
Annex B. Glossary of Terms
This Glossary is based on the glossaries published in the IPCC
Third Assessment Report (IPCC, 2001a,b,c); however, additional
work has been undertaken on consistency and refinement of
some of the terms. The terms that are independent entries in
this glossary are highlighted in italics.
Acclimatization
The physiological adaptation to climatic variations.
Activities Implemented Jointly (AIJ)
The pilot phase for Joint Implementation, as defined in Article
.2(a) of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, that allows for project activity among
developed countries (and their companies) and between
developed and developing countries (and their companies).
AIJ is intended to allow Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change to gain experience
in jointly implemented project activities. There is no crediting
for AIJ activity during the pilot phase. A decision remains to
be taken on the future of AIJ projects and how they may relate
to the Kyoto Mechanisms. As a simple form of tradable permits,
AIJ and other market-based schemes represent important
potential mechanisms for stimulating additional resource flows
for the global environmental good. See also Clean
Development Mechanism and emissions trading.
Adaptability
See Adaptive capacity.
Adaptation
Adjustment in natural or human systems to a new or changing
environment. Adaptation to climate change refers to
adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual
or expected climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates
harm or exploits beneficial opportunities. Various types of
adaptation can be distinguished, including anticipatory and
reactive adaptation, private and public adaptation, and
autonomous and planned adaptation.
Adaptation assessment
The practice of identifying options to adapt to climate change
and evaluating them in terms of criteria such as availability,
benefits, costs, effectiveness, efficiency, and feasibility.
Adaptation benefits
The avoided damage costs or the accrued benefits following
the adoption and implementation of adaptation measures.
Adaptation costs
Costs of planning, preparing for, facilitating, and implementing
adaptation measures, including transition costs.
Adaptive capacity
The ability of a system to adjust to climate change (including climate
variability and extremes) to moderate potential damages, to take
advantage of opportunities, or to cope with the consequences.
Additionality
Reduction in emissions by sources or enhancement of removals
by sinks that is additional to any that would occur in the absence
of a Joint Implementation or a Clean Development Mechanism
project activity as defined in the Kyoto Protocol Articles on Joint
Implementation and the Clean Development Mechanism. This
definition may be further broadened to include financial,
investment, and technology additionality. Under “financial
additionality,” the project activity funding shall be additional
to existing Global Environmental Facility, other financial
commitments of Parties included in Annex I, Official
Development Assistance, and other systems of cooperation.
Under “investment additionality,” the value of the Emissions
Reduction Unit/Certified Emission Reduction Unit shall
significantly improve the financial and/or commercial viability
of the project activity. Under “technology additionality,” the
technology used for the project activity shall be the best
available for the circumstances of the host Party.
Adjustment time
See Lifetime; see also Response time.
Aerosols
A collection of airborne solid or liquid particles, with a typical
size between 0.01 and 10 mm that reside in the atmosphere
for at least several hours. Aerosols may be of either natural or
anthropogenic origin. Aerosols may influence climate in two
ways: directly through scattering and absorbing radiation, and
indirectly through acting as condensation nuclei for cloud
formation or modifying the optical properties and lifetime of
clouds. See indirect aerosol effect.
Afforestation
Planting of new forests on lands that historically have not
contained forests. For a discussion of the term forest and related
terms such as afforestation, reforestation, and deforestation,
see the IPCC Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change,
and Forestry (IPCC, 2000b).
Aggregate impacts
Total impacts summed up across sectors and/or regions. The
aggregation of impacts requires knowledge of (or assumptions
about) the relative importance of impacts in different sectors and
regions. Measures of aggregate impacts include, for example, the
total number of people affected, change in net primary productivity,
number of systems undergoing change, or total economic costs.
Albedo
The fraction of solar radiation reflected by a surface or object,
often expressed as a percentage. Snow covered surfaces have

Climate Change 2001 Synthesis Report
IPCC Third Assessment Report
a high albedo; the albedo of soils ranges from high to low;
vegetation covered surfaces and oceans have a low albedo.
The Earth’s albedo varies mainly through varying cloudiness,
snow, ice, leaf area, and land cover changes.
Algal blooms
A reproductive explosion of algae in a lake, river, or ocean.
Alpine
The biogeographic zone made up of slopes above timberline
and characterized by the presence of rosette-forming
herbaceous plants and low shrubby slow-growing woody
plants.
Alternative development paths
Refer to a variety of possible scenarios for societal values
and consumption and production patterns in all countries,
including, but not limited to, a continuation of today’s trends.
In this report, these paths do not include additional climate
initiatives which means that no scenarios are included that
explicitly assume implementation of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change or the emission
targets of the Kyoto Protocol, but do include assumptions about
other policies that influence greenhouse gas emissions
indirectly.
Alternative energy
Energy derived from non-fossil-fuel sources.
Ancillary benefits
The ancillary, or side effects, of policies aimed exclusively at
climate change mitigation. Such policies have an impact not
only on greenhouse gas emissions, but also on resource use
efficiency, like reduction in emissions of local and regional
air pollutants associated with fossil-fuel use, and on issues
such as transportation, agriculture, land-use practices,
employment, and fuel security. Sometimes these benefits are
referred to as “ancillary impacts” to reflect that in some cases
the benefits may be negative. From the perspective of policies
directed at abating local air pollution, greenhouse gas
mitigation may also be considered an ancillary benefit, but
these relationships are not considered in this assessment.
Annex I countries/Parties
Group of countries included in Annex I (as amended in 1998)
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, including all the developed countries in the
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development,
and economies in transition. By default, the other countries
are referred to as non-Annex I countries. Under Articles 4.2(a)
and 4.2(b) of the Convention, Annex I countries commit
themselves specifically to the aim of returning individually or
jointly to their 1990 levels of greenhouse gas emissions by
the year 2000. See also Annex II, Annex B, and non-Annex B
countries.
Annex II countries
Group of countries included in Annex II to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, including all
developed countries in the Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development. Under Article 4.2(g) of the
Convention, these countries are expected to provide financial
resources to assist developing countries to comply with their
obligations, such as preparing national reports. Annex II
countries are also expected to promote the transfer of
environmentally sound technologies to developing countries.
See also Annex I, Annex B, non-Annex I, and non-Annex B
countries/Parties.
Annex B countries/Parties
Group of countries included in Annex B in the Kyoto Protocol
that have agreed to a target for their greenhouse gas emissions,
including all the Annex I countries (as amended in 1998) but
Turkey and Belarus. See also Annex II, non-Annex I, and non-
Annex B countries/Parties.
Anthropogenic
Resulting from or produced by human beings.
Anthropogenic emissions
Emissions of greenhouse gases, greenhouse gas precursors,
and aerosols associated with human activities. These include
burning of fossil fuels for energy, deforestation, and land-use
changes that result in net increase in emissions.
Aquaculture
Breeding and rearing fish, shellfish, etc., or growing plants
for food in special ponds.
Aquifer
A stratum of permeable rock that bears water. An unconfined
aquifer is recharged directly by local rainfall, rivers, and lakes,
and the rate of recharge will be influenced by the permeability
of the overlying rocks and soils. A confined aquifer is
characterized by an overlying bed that is impermeable and
the local rainfall does not influence the aquifer.
Arid regions
Ecosystems with less than 250 mm precipitation per year.
Assigned amounts (AAs)
Under the Kyoto Protocol, the total amount of greenhouse
gas emissions that each Annex B country has agreed that its
emissions will not exceed in the first commitment period (2008
to 2012) is the assigned amount. This is calculated by
multiplying the country’s total greenhouse gas emissions in
by five (for the 5-year commitment period) and then by
the percentage it agreed to as listed in Annex B of the Kyoto
Protocol (e.g., 92% for the European Union, 93% for the USA).

Annex B Glossary of Terms
Assigned amount unit (AAU)
Equal to 1 tonne (metric ton) of CO2-equivalent emissions
calculated using the Global Warming Potential.
Atmosphere
The gaseous envelop surrounding the Earth. The dry atmosphere
consists almost entirely of nitrogen (78.1% volume mixing
ratio) and oxygen (20.9% volume mixing ratio), together with
a number of trace gases, such as argon (0.93% volume mixing
ratio), helium, and radiatively active greenhouse gases such
as carbon dioxide (0.035% volume mixing ratio) and ozone.
In addition, the atmosphere contains water vapor, whose
amount is highly variable but typically 1% volume mixing
ratio. The atmosphere also contains clouds and aerosols.
Attribution
See detection and attribution.
Banking
According to the Kyoto Protocol [Article 3(13)], Parties
included in Annex I to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change may save excess emissions
allowances or credits from the first commitment period for
use in subsequent commitment periods (post-2012).
Barrier
A barrier is any obstacle to reaching a potential that can be
overcome by a policy, program, or measure.
Baseline
The baseline (or reference) is any datum against which change
is measured. It might be a “current baseline,” in which case it
represents observable, present-day conditions. It might also
be a “future baseline,” which is a projected future set of
conditions excluding the driving factor of interest. Alternative
interpretations of the reference conditions can give rise to
multiple baselines.
Basin
The drainage area of a stream, river, or lake.
Biodiversity
The numbers and relative abundances of different genes
(genetic diversity), species, and ecosystems (communities) in
a particular area.
Biofuel
A fuel produced from dry organic matter or combustible oils
produced by plants. Examples of biofuel include alcohol (from
fermented sugar), black liquor from the paper manufacturing
process, wood, and soybean oil.
Biomass
The total mass of living organisms in a given area or volume;
recently dead plant material is often included as dead biomass.
Biome
A grouping of similar plant and animal communities into broad
landscape units that occur under similar environmental
conditions.
Biosphere (terrestrial and marine)
The part of the Earth system comprising all ecosystems and
living organisms in the atmosphere, on land (terrestrial
biosphere), or in the oceans (marine biosphere), including
derived dead organic matter such as litter, soil organic matter,
and oceanic detritus.
Biota
All living organisms of an area; the flora and fauna considered
as a unit.
Black carbon
Operationally defined species based on measurement of light
absorption and chemical reactivity and/or thermal stability;
consists of soot, charcoal, and/or possible light-absorbing
refractory organic matter (Charlson and Heintzenberg, 1995).
Bog
A poorly drained area rich in accumulated plant material,
frequently surrounding a body of open water and having a
characteristic flora (such as sedges, heaths, and sphagnum).
Boreal forest
Forests of pine, spruce, fir, and larch stretching from the east
coast of Canada westward to Alaska and continuing from
Siberia westward across the entire extent of Russia to the
European Plain.
Bottom-up models
A modeling approach that includes technological and
engineering details in the analysis. See also top-down models.
Burden
The total mass of a gaseous substance of concern in the
atmosphere.
Capacity building
In the context of climate change, capacity building is a process
of developing the technical skills and institutional capability
in developing countries and economies in transition to enable
them to participate in all aspects of adaptation to, mitigation
of, and research on climate change, and the implementation
of the Kyoto Mechanisms, etc.
Carbonaceous aerosol
Aerosol consisting predominantly of organic substances and
various forms of black carbon (Charlson and Heintzenberg,
).

Climate Change 2001 Synthesis Report
IPCC Third Assessment Report
Carbon cycle
The term used to describe the flow of carbon (in various forms
such as as carbon dioxide) through the atmosphere, ocean,
terrestrial biosphere, and lithosphere.
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
A naturally occurring gas, and also a by-product of burning
fossil fuels and biomass, as well as land-use changes and other
industrial processes. It is the principal anthropogenic
greenhouse gas that affects the Earth’s radiative balance. It
is the reference gas against which other greenhouse gases are
measured and therefore has a Global Warming Potential of 1.
Carbon dioxide (CO2) fertilization
The enhancement of the growth of plants as a result of increased
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration. Depending on their
mechanism of photosynthesis, certain types of plants are more
sensitive to changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration.
In particular, plants that produce a three-carbon compound (C3)
during photosynthesis—including most trees and agricultural
crops such as rice, wheat, soybeans, potatoes, and vegetables—
generally show a larger response than plants that produce a
four-carbon compound (C4) during photosynthesis—mainly
of tropical origin, including grasses and the agriculturally
important crops maize, sugar cane, millet, and sorghum.
Carbon leakage
See leakage.
Carbon taxes
See emissions tax.
Catchment
An area that collects and drains rainwater.
Certified Emission Reduction (CER) Unit
Equal to 1 tonne (metric ton) of CO2-equivalent emissions
reduced or sequestered through a Clean Development
Mechanism project, calculated using Global Warming
Potentials. See also Emissions Reduction Unit.
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
Greenhouse gases covered under the 1987 Montreal Protocol
and used for refrigeration, air conditioning, packaging,
insulation, solvents, or aerosol propellants. Since they are not
destroyed in the lower atmosphere, CFCs drift into the upper
atmosphere where, given suitable conditions, they break down
ozone. These gases are being replaced by other compounds,
including hydrochlorofluorocarbons and hydrofluorocarbons,
which are greenhouse gases covered under the Kyoto Protocol.
Cholera
An intestinal infection that results in frequent watery stools,
cramping abdominal pain, and eventual collapse from dehydration.
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)
Defined in Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol, the Clean
Development Mechanism is intended to meet two objectives:
(1) to assist Parties not included in Annex I in achieving
sustainable development and in contributing to the ultimate
objective of the convention; and (2) to assist Parties included
in Annex I in achieving compliance with their quantified
emission limitation and reduction commitments. Certified
Emission Reduction Units from Clean Development
Mechanism projects undertaken in non-Annex I countries that
limit or reduce greenhouse gas emissions, when certified by
operational entities designated by Conference of the Parties/
Meeting of the Parties, can be accrued to the investor
(government or industry) from Parties in Annex B. A share of
the proceeds from the certified project activities is used to
cover administrative expenses as well as to assist developing
country Parties that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse
effects of climate change to meet the costs of adaptation.
Climate
Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the “average
weather” or more rigorously as the statistical description in
terms of the mean and variability of relevant quantities over a
period of time ranging from months to thousands or millions
of years. The classical period is 30 years, as defined by the
World Meteorological Organization (WMO). These relevant
quantities are most often surface variables such as temperature,
precipitation, and wind. Climate in a wider sense is the state,
including a statistical description, of the climate system.
Climate change
Climate change refers to a statistically significant variation in
either the mean state of the climate or in its variability,
persisting for an extended period (typically decades or longer).
Climate change may be due to natural internal processes or
external forcings, or to persistent anthropogenic changes in
the composition of the atmosphere or in land use. Note that
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC), in its Article 1, defines “climate change”
as: “a change of climate which is attributed directly or
indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of the
global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate
variability observed over comparable time periods.” The
UNFCCC thus makes a distinction between “climate change”
attributable to human activities altering the atmospheric
composition, and “climate variability” attributable to natural
causes. See also climate variability.
Climate feedback
An interaction mechanism between processes in the climate
system is called a climate feedback, when the result of an initial
process triggers changes in a second process that in turn
influences the initial one. A positive feedback intensifies the
original process, and a negative feedback reduces it.

Annex B Glossary of Terms
Climate model (hierarchy)
A numerical representation of the climate system based on the
physical, chemical, and biological properties of its components,
their interactions and feedback processes, and accounting for
all or some of its known properties. The climate system can be
represented by models of varying complexity—that is, for any
one component or combination of components a “hierarchy”
of models can be identified, differing in such aspects as the
number of spatial dimensions, the extent to which physical,
chemical or biological processes are explicitly represented,
or the level at which empirical parametrizations are involved.
Coupled atmosphere/ocean/sea-ice general circulation models
(AOGCMs) provide a comprehensive representation of the
climate system. There is an evolution towards more complex
models with active chemistry and biology. Climate models
are applied, as a research tool, to study and simulate the
climate, but also for operational purposes, including monthly,
seasonal, and interannual climate predictions.
Climate prediction
A climate prediction or climate forecast is the result of an
attempt to produce a most likely description or estimate of the
actual evolution of the climate in the future (e.g., at seasonal,
interannual, or long-term time-scales). See also climate
projection and climate (change) scenario.
Climate projection
A projection of the response of the climate system to emission or
concentration scenarios of greenhouse gases and aerosols, or
radiative forcing scenarios, often based upon simulations by
climate models. Climate projections are distinguished from climate
predictions in order to emphasize that climate projections depend
upon the emission/concentration/radiative forcing scenario used,
which are based on assumptions, concerning, for example, future
socio-economic and technological developments that may or may
not be realized, and are therefore subject to substantial uncertainty.
Climate scenario
A plausible and often simplified representation of the future
climate, based on an internally consistent set of climatological
relationships, that has been constructed for explicit use in
investigating the potential consequences of anthropogenic
climate change, often serving as input to impact models.
Climate projections often serve as the raw material for
constructing climate scenarios, but climate scenarios usually
require additional information such as about the observed
current climate. A “climate change scenario” is the difference
between a climate scenario and the current climate.
Climate sensitivity
In IPCC assessments, “equilibrium climate sensitivity” refers
to the equilibrium change in global mean surface temperature
following a doubling of the atmospheric (equivalent) CO2
concentration. More generally, equilibrium climate sensitivity
refers to the equilibrium change in surface air temperature
following a unit change in radiative forcing (°C/Wm-2). In
practice, the evaluation of the equilibrium climate sensitivity
requires very long simulations with coupled general circulation
models. The “effective climate sensitivity” is a related measure
that circumvents this requirement. It is evaluated from model
output for evolving non-equilibrium conditions. It is a measure
of the strengths of the feedbacks at a particular time and may
vary with forcing history and climate state. See climate model.
Climate system
The climate system is the highly complex system consisting
of five major components: the atmosphere, the hydrosphere,
the cryosphere, the land surface and the biosphere, and the
interactions between them. The climate system evolves in time
under the influence of its own internal dynamics and because
of external forcings such as volcanic eruptions, solar variations,
and human-induced forcings such as the changing composition
of the atmosphere and land-use change.
Climate variability
Climate variability refers to variations in the mean state and other
statistics (such as standard deviations, the occurrence of extremes,
etc.) of the climate on all temporal and spatial scales beyond
that of individual weather events. Variability may be due to
natural internal processes within the climate system (internal
variability), or to variations in natural or anthropogenic
external forcing (external variability). See also climate change.
CO2-equivalent
See equivalent CO2.
CO2 fertilization
See carbon dioxide (CO2) fertilization.
Co-benefits
The benefits of policies that are implemented for various reasons
at the same time—including climate change mitigation—
acknowledging that most policies designed to address
greenhouse gas mitigation also have other, often at least
equally important, rationales (e.g., related to objectives of
development, sustainability, and equity). The term co-impact
is also used in a more generic sense to cover both the positive
and negative sides of the benefits. See also ancillary benefits.
Co-generation
The use of waste heat from electric generation, such as exhaust
from gas turbines, for either industrial purposes or district heating.
Compliance
See implementation.
Conference of the Parties (COP)
The supreme body of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC), comprising countries that have
ratified or acceded to the UNFCCC. The first session of the

Climate Change 2001 Synthesis Report
IPCC Third Assessment Report
Conference of the Parties (COP-1) was held in Berlin in 1995,
followed by COP-2 in Geneva 1996, COP-3 in Kyoto 1997,
COP-4 in Buenos Aires 1998, COP-5 in Bonn 1999, COP-6
Part 1 in The Hague 2000, and COP-6 Part 2 in Bonn 2001.
COP-7 is scheduled for November 2001 in Marrakech. See
also Meeting of the Parties (MOP).
Cooling degree days
The integral over a day of the temperature above 18°C (e.g., a
day with an average temperature of 20°C counts as 2 cooling
degree days). See also heating degree days.
Coping range
The variation in climatic stimuli that a system can absorb
without producing significant impacts.
Coral bleaching
The paling in color of corals resulting from a loss of symbiotic
algae. Bleaching occurs in response to physiological shock in
response to abrupt changes in temperature, salinity, and turbidity.
Cost-effective
A criterion that specifies that a technology or measure delivers
a good or service at equal or lower cost than current practice, or
the least-cost alternative for the achievement of a given target.
Cryosphere
The component of the climate system consisting of all snow,
ice, and permafrost on and beneath the surface of the earth
and ocean. See also glacier and ice sheet.
Deepwater formation
Occurs when seawater freezes to form sea ice. The local release
of salt and consequent increase in water density leads to the
formation of saline coldwater that sinks to the ocean floor.
Deforestation
Conversion of forest to non-forest. For a discussion of the
term forest and related terms such as afforestation,
reforestation, and deforestation, see the IPCC Special Report
on Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000b).
Demand-side management
Policies and programs designed for a specific purpose to
influence consumer demand for goods and/or services. In the
energy sector, for instance, it refers to policies and programs
designed to reduce consumer demand for electricity and other
energy sources. It helps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Dengue Fever
An infectious viral disease spread by mosquitoes often called
breakbone fever because it is characterized by severe pain in
joints and back. Subsequent infections of the virus may lead
to dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengue shock
syndrome (DSS), which may be fatal.
Deposit–refund system
Combines a deposit or fee (tax) on a commodity with a refund
or rebate (subsidy) for implementation of a specified action.
Se also emissions tax.
Desert
An ecosystem with less than 100 mm precipitation per year.
Desertification
Land degradation in arid, semi-arid, and dry sub-humid areas
resulting from various factors, including climatic variations
and human activities. Further, the United Nations Convention
to Combat Desertification defines land degradation as a
reduction or loss in arid, semi-arid, and dry sub-humid areas
of the biological or economic productivity and complexity of
rain-fed cropland, irrigated cropland, or range, pasture, forest,
and woodlands resulting from land uses or from a process or
combination of processes, including processes arising from
human activities and habitation patterns, such as: (i) soil
erosion caused by wind and/or water; (ii) deterioration of the
physical, chemical, and biological or economic properties of
soil; and (iii) long-term loss of natural vegetation.
Detection and attribution
Climate varies continually on all time scales. Detection of climate
change is the process of demonstrating that climate has
changed in some defined statistical sense, without providing
a reason for that change. Attribution of causes of climate
change is the process of establishing the most likely causes
for the detected change with some defined level of confidence.
Disturbance regime
Frequency, intensity, and types of disturbances, such as fires,
inspect or pest outbreaks, floods, and droughts.
Diurnal temperature range
The difference between the maximum and minimum
temperature during a day.
Double dividend
The effect that revenue-generating instruments, such as carbon
taxes or auctioned (tradable) carbon emission permits, can (i)
limit or reduce greenhouse gas emissions and (ii) offset at
least part of the potential welfare losses of climate policies
through recycling the revenue in the economy to reduce other
taxes likely to be distortionary. In a world with involuntary
unemployment, the climate change policy adopted may have an
effect (a positive or negative “third dividend”) on employment.
Weak double dividend occurs as long as there is a revenue
recycling effect—that is, as long as revenues are recycled
through reductions in the marginal rates of distortionary taxes.
Strong double dividend requires that the (beneficial) revenue
recycling effect more than offset the combination of the
primary cost and, in this case, the net cost of abatement is
negative.

Annex B Glossary of Terms
Drought
The phenomenon that exists when precipitation has been
significantly below normal recorded levels, causing serious
hydrological imbalances that adversely affect land resource
production systems.
Economic potential
Economic potential is the portion of technological potential
for greenhouse gas emissions reductions or energy efficiency
improvements that could be achieved cost-effectively through
the creation of markets, reduction of market failures, or increased
financial and technological transfers. The achievement of
economic potential requires additional policies and measures
to break down market barriers. See also market potential,
socio-economic potential, and technological potential.
Economies in transition (EITs)
Countries with national economies in the process of changing
from a planned economic system to a market economy.
Ecosystem
A system of interacting living organisms together with their
physical environment. The boundaries of what could be called
an ecosystem are somewhat arbitrary, depending on the focus
of interest or study. Thus, the extent of an ecosystem may range
from very small spatial scales to, ultimately, the entire Earth.
Ecosystem services
Ecological processes or functions that have value to individuals
or society.
El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
El Niño, in its original sense, is a warmwater current that periodically
flows along the coast of Ecuador and Peru, disrupting the local
fishery. This oceanic event is associated with a fluctuation of the
intertropical surface pressure pattern and circulation in the Indian
and Pacific Oceans, called the Southern Oscillation. This coupled
atmosphere-ocean phenomenon is collectively known as El Niño
Southern Oscillation, or ENSO. During an El Niño event, the
prevailing trade winds weaken and the equatorial countercurrent
strengthens, causing warm surface waters in the Indonesian area
to flow eastward to overlie the cold waters of the Peru current.
This event has great impact on the wind, sea surface temperature,
and precipitation patterns in the tropical Pacific. It has climatic
effects throughout the Pacific region and in many other parts of
the world. The opposite of an El Niño event is called La Niña.
Emissions
In the climate change context, emissions refer to the release
of greenhouse gases and/or their precursors and aerosols into
the atmosphere over a specified area and period of time.
Emissions permit
An emissions permit is the non-transferable or tradable
allocation of entitlements by an administrative authority
(intergovernmental organization, central or local government
agency) to a regional (country, sub-national) or a sectoral (an
individual firm) entity to emit a specified amount of a substance.
Emissions quota
The portion or share of total allowable emissions assigned to a
country or group of countries within a framework of maximum
total emissions and mandatory allocations of resources.
Emissions Reduction Unit (ERU)
Equal to 1 tonne (metric ton) of carbon dioxide emissions
reduced or sequestered arising from a Joint Implementation
(defined in Article 6 of the Kyoto Protocol) project calculated
using Global Warming Potential. See also Certified Emission
Reduction Unit and emissions trading.
Emissions tax
Levy imposed by a government on each unit of CO2-equivalent
emissions by a source subject to the tax. Since virtually all of
the carbon in fossil fuels is ultimately emitted as carbon dioxide,
a levy on the carbon content of fossil fuels—a carbon tax—is
equivalent to an emissions tax for emissions caused by fossilfuel
combustion. An energy tax—a levy on the energy content
of fuels—reduces demand for energy and so reduces carbon
dioxide emissions from fossil-fuel use. An ecotax is designated
for the purpose of influencing human behavior (specifically
economic behavior) to follow an ecologically benign path.
International emissions/carbon/energy tax is a tax imposed on
specified sources in participating countries by an international
agency. The revenue is distributed or used as specified by
participating countries or the international agency.
Emissions trading
A market-based approach to achieving environmental objectives
that allows, those reducing greenhouse gas emissions below
what is required, to use or trade the excess reductions to offset
emissions at another source inside or outside the country. In
general, trading can occur at the intracompany, domestic, and
international levels. The IPCC Second Assessment Report
adopted the convention of using “permits” for domestic trading
systems and “quotas” for international trading systems. Emissions
trading under Article 17 of the Kyoto Protocol is a tradable
quota system based on the assigned amounts calculated from
the emission reduction and limitation commitments listed in
Annex B of the Protocol. See also Certified Emission Reduction
Unit and Clean Development Mechanism.
Emissions scenario
A plausible representation of the future development of
emissions of substances that are potentially radiatively active
(e.g., greenhouse gases, aerosols), based on a coherent and
internally consistent set of assumptions about driving forces
(such as demographic and socio-economic development,
technological change) and their key relationships. Concentration
scenarios, derived from emissions scenarios, are used as input

Climate Change 2001 Synthesis Report
IPCC Third Assessment Report
into a climate model to compute climate projections. In IPCC
(1992), a set of emissions scenarios were used as a basis for
the climate projections in IPCC (1996). These emissions
scenarios are referred to as the IS92 scenarios. In the IPCC
Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (Nakicenovic et al.,
), new emissions scenarios—the so-called SRES
scenarios—were published. For the meaning of some terms
related to these scenarios, see SRES scenarios.
Endemic
Restricted or peculiar to a locality or region. With regard to human
health, endemic can refer to a disease or agent present or usually
prevalent in a population or geographical area at all times.
Energy balance
Averaged over the globe and over longer time periods, the
energy budget of the climate system must be in balance.
Because the climate system derives all its energy from the
Sun, this balance implies that, globally, the amount of incoming
solar radiation must on average be equal to the sum of the
outgoing reflected solar radiation and the outgoing infrared
radiation emitted by the climate system. A perturbation of
this global radiation balance, be it human-induced or natural,
is called radiative forcing.
Energy conversion
See energy transformation.
Energy efficiency
Ratio of energy output of a conversion process or of a system
to its energy input.
Energy intensity
Energy intensity is the ratio of energy consumption to economic
or physical output. At the national level, energy intensity is the
ratio of total domestic primary energy consumption or final energy
consumption to Gross Domestic Product or physical output.
Energy service
The application of useful energy to tasks desired by the
consumer such as transportation, a warm room, or light.
Energy tax
See emissions tax.
Energy transformation
The change from one form of energy, such as the energy
embodied in fossil fuels, to another, such as electricity.
Environmentally Sound Technologies (ESTs)
Technologies that protect the environment, are less polluting,
use all resources in a more sustainable manner, recycle more
of their wastes and products, and handle residual wastes in a
more acceptable manner than the technologies for which they
were substitutes and are compatible with nationally determined
socio-economic, cultural, and environmental priorities. ESTs
in this report imply mitigation and adaptation technologies, hard
and soft technologies.
Epidemic
Occurring suddenly in numbers clearly in excess of normal
expectancy, said especially of infectious diseases but applied also
to any disease, injury, or other health-related event occurring in
such outbreaks.
Equilibrium and transient climate experiment
An “equilibrium climate experiment” is an experiment in which
a climate model is allowed to fully adjust to a change in radiative
forcing. Such experiments provide information on the difference
between the initial and final states of the model, but not on the
time-dependent response. If the forcing is allowed to evolve
gradually according to a prescribed emission scenario, the timedependent
response of a climate model may be analyzed. Such
an experiment is called a “transient climate experiment.” See
also climate projection.
Equivalent CO2 (carbon dioxide)
The concentration of carbon dioxide that would cause the same
amount of radiative forcing as a given mixture of carbon dioxide
and other greenhouse gases.
Erosion
The process of removal and transport of soil and rock by
weathering, mass wasting, and the action of streams, glaciers,
waves, winds, and underground water.
Eustatic sea-level change
A change in global average sea level brought about by an
alteration to the volume of the world ocean. This may be caused
by changes in water density or in the total mass of water. In
discussions of changes on geological time scales, this term
sometimes also includes changes in global average sea level
caused by an alteration to the shape of the ocean basins. In this
report, the term is not used in that sense.
Eutrophication
The process by which a body of water (often shallow) becomes
(either naturally or by pollution) rich in dissolved nutrients with
a seasonal deficiency in dissolved oxygen.
Evaporation
The process by which a liquid becomes a gas.
Evapotranspiration
The combined process of evaporation from the Earth’s surface
and transpiration from vegetation.
Exotic species
See introduced species.

Annex B Glossary of Terms
Exposure
The nature and degree to which a system is exposed to
significant climatic variations.
Externality
See external cost.
External cost
Used to define the costs arising from any human activity, when
the agent responsible for the activity does not take full account
of the impacts on others of his or her actions. Equally, when
the impacts are positive and not accounted for in the actions
of the agent responsible they are referred to as external benefits.
Emissions of particulate pollution from a power station affect
the health of people in the vicinity, but this is not often
considered, or is given inadequate weight, in private decision
making and there is no market for such impacts. Such a
phenomenon is referred to as an “externality,” and the costs it
imposes are referred to as the external costs.
External forcing
See climate system.
Extinction
The complete disappearance of an entire species.
Extirpation
The disappearance of a species from part of its range; local
extinction.
Extreme weather event
An extreme weather event is an event that is rare within its
statistical reference distribution at a particular place.
Definitions of “rare” vary, but an extreme weather event would
normally be as rare as or rarer than the 10th or 90th percentile.
By definition, the characteristics of what is called extreme
weather may vary from place to place. An extreme climate
event is an average of a number of weather events over a certain
period of time, an average which is itself extreme (e.g., rainfall
over a season).
Feedback
See climate feedback.
Fiber
Wood, fuelwood (either woody or non-woody).
Final energy
Energy supplied that is available to the consumer to be converted
into usable energy (e.g., electricity at the wall outlet).
Flexibility mechanisms
See Kyoto Mechanisms.
Flux adjustment
To avoid the problem of coupled atmosphere-ocean general
circulation models drifting into some unrealistic climate state,
adjustment terms can be applied to the atmosphere-ocean fluxes
of heat and moisture (and sometimes the surface stresses resulting
from the effect of the wind on the ocean surface) before these
fluxes are imposed on the model ocean and atmosphere. Because
these adjustments are pre-computed and therefore independent
of the coupled model integration, they are uncorrelated to the
anomalies that develop during the integration.
Food insecurity
A situation that exists when people lack secure access to sufficient
amounts of safe and nutritious food for normal growth and
development and an active and healthy life. It may be caused
by the unavailability of food, insufficient purchasing power,
inappropriate distribution, or inadequate use of food at the
household level. Food insecurity may be chronic, seasonal, or
transitory.
Forest
A vegetation type dominated by trees. Many definitions of the
term forest are in use throughout the world, reflecting wide
differences in bio-geophysical conditions, social structure, and
economics. For a discussion of the term forest and related
terms such as afforestation, reforestation, and deforestation:
see the IPCC Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change,
and Forestry (IPCC, 2000b).
Fossil CO2 (carbon dioxide) emissions
Emissions of carbon dioxide resulting from the combustion
of fuels from fossil carbon deposits such as oil, natural gas,
and coal.
Fossil fuels
Carbon-based fuels from fossil carbon deposits, including coal,
oil, and natural gas.
Freshwater lens
A lenticular fresh groundwater body that underlies an oceanic
island. It is underlain by saline water.
Fuel switching
Policy designed to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by switching
to lower carbon-content fuels, such as from coal to natural gas.
Full-cost pricing
The pricing of commercial goods—such as electric power—
that includes in the final prices faced by the end user not only
the private costs of inputs, but also the costs of externalities
created by their production and use.
Framework Convention on Climate Change
See United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.

Climate Change 2001 Synthesis Report
IPCC Third Assessment Report
General circulation
The large scale motions of the atmosphere and the ocean as a
consequence of differential heating on a rotating Earth, aiming
to restore the energy balance of the system through transport
of heat and momentum.
General Circulation Model (GCM)
See climate model.
Geo-engineering
Efforts to stabilize the climate system by directly managing
the energy balance of the Earth, thereby overcoming the
enhanced greenhouse effect.
Glacier
A mass of land ice flowing downhill (by internal deformation
and sliding at the base) and constrained by the surrounding
topography (e.g., the sides of a valley or surrounding peaks);
the bedrock topography is the major influence on the dynamics
and surface slope of a glacier. A glacier is maintained by
accumulation of snow at high altitudes, balanced by melting
at low altitudes or discharge into the sea.
Global surface temperature
The global surface temperature is the area-weighted global
average of (i) the sea surface temperature over the oceans (i.e.,
the sub-surface bulk temperature in the first few meters of the
ocean), and (ii) the surface air temperature over land at 1.5 m
above the ground.
Global Warming Potential (GWP)
An index, describing the radiative characteristics of well-mixed
greenhouse gases, that represents the combined effect of the
differing times these gases remain in the atmosphere and their
relative effectiveness in absorbing outgoing infrared radiation.
This index approximates the time-integrated warming effect
of a unit mass of a given greenhouse gas in today’s atmosphere,
relative to that of carbon dioxide.
Greenhouse effect
Greenhouse gases effectively absorb infrared radiation, emitted
by the Earth’s surface, by the atmosphere itself due to the same
gases, and by clouds. Atmospheric radiation is emitted to all sides,
including downward to the Earth’s surface. Thus greenhouse
gases trap heat within the surface-troposphere system. This is
called the “natural greenhouse effect.” Atmospheric radiation
is strongly coupled to the temperature of the level at which it
is emitted. In the troposphere, the temperature generally decreases
with height. Effectively, infrared radiation emitted to space
originates from an altitude with a temperature of, on average,
-19°C, in balance with the net incoming solar radiation, whereas
the Earth’s surface is kept at a much higher temperature of, on
average, +14°C. An increase in the concentration of greenhouse
gases leads to an increased infrared opacity of the atmosphere,
and therefore to an effective radiation into space from a higher
altitude at a lower temperature. This causes a radiative forcing,
an imbalance that can only be compensated for by an increase
of the temperature of the surface-troposphere system. This is
the “enhanced greenhouse effect.”
Greenhouse gas
Greenhouse gases are those gaseous constituents of the atmosphere,
both natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation
at specific wavelengths within the spectrum of infrared radiation
emitted by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere, and clouds. This
property causes the greenhouse effect. Water vapor (H2O), carbon
dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4), and ozone
(O3) are the primary greenhouse gases in the Earth’s atmosphere.
Moreover there are a number of entirely human-made greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere, such as the halocarbons and other
chlorine- and bromine-containing substances, dealt with under
the Montreal Protocol. Besides CO2, N2O, and CH4, the Kyoto
Protocol deals with the greenhouse gases sulfur hexafluoride (SF6),
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), and perfluorocarbons (PFCs).
Groin
A low, narrow jetty, usually extending roughly perpendicular
to the shoreline, designed to protect the shore from erosion by
currents, tides, or waves, or to trap sand for the purpose of
building up or making a beach.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
The sum of gross value added, at purchasers’ prices, by all
resident and non-resident producers in the economy, plus any
taxes and minus any subsidies not included in the value of the
products in a country or a geographic region for a given period
of time, normally 1 year. It is calculated without deducting for
depreciation of fabricated assets or depletion and degradation
of natural resources. GDP is an often used but incomplete
measure of welfare.
Gross Primary Production (GPP)
The amount of carbon fixed from the atmosphere through
photosynthesis.
Groundwater recharge
The process by which external water is added to the zone of
saturation of an aquifer, either directly into a formation or
indirectly by way of another formation.
Habitat
The particular environment or place where an organism or
species tend to live; a more locally circumscribed portion of
the total environment.
Halocarbons
Compounds containing carbon and either chlorine, bromine,
or fluorine. Such compounds can act as powerful greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere. The chlorine- and bromine-containing
halocarbons are also involved in the depletion of the ozone layer.

Annex B Glossary of Terms
Harmonized emissions/carbon/energy tax
Commits participating countries to impose a tax at a common
rate on the same sources. Each country can retain the tax
revenue it collects. A harmonized tax would not necessarily
require countries to impose a tax at the same rate, but imposing
different rates across countries would not be cost-effective.
See also emissions tax.
Heat island
An area within an urban area characterized by ambient
temperatures higher than those of the surrounding area because
of the absorption of solar energy by materials like asphalt.
Heating degree days
The integral over a day of the temperature below 18°C (e.g., a
day with an average temperature of 16°C counts as 2 heating
degree days). See also cooling degree days.
Hedging
In the context of climate change mitigation, hedging is defined
as balancing the risks of acting too slowly against acting too
quickly, and it depends on society’s attitude towards risks.
Heterotrophic respiration
The conversion of organic matter to CO2 by organisms other
than plants.
Human settlement
A place or area occupied by settlers.
Human system
Any system in which human organizations play a major role.
Often, but not always, the term is synonymous with “society”
or “social system” (e.g., agricultural system, political system,
technological system, economic system).
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)
Among the six greenhouse gases to be curbed under the Kyoto
Protocol. They are produced commercially as a substitute for
chlorofluorocarbons. HFCs largely are used in refrigeration
and semiconductor manufacturing. Their Global Warming
Potentials range from 1,300 to 11,700.
Hydrosphere
The component of the climate system composed of liquid
surface and subterranean water, such as oceans, seas, rivers,
freshwater lakes, underground water, etc.
Ice cap
A dome shaped ice mass covering a highland area that is
considerably smaller in extent than an ice sheet.
Ice sheet
A mass of land ice that is sufficiently deep to cover most of
the underlying bedrock topography, so that its shape is mainly
determined by its internal dynamics (the flow of the ice as it
deforms internally and slides at its base). An ice sheet flows
outward from a high central plateau with a small average
surface slope. The margins slope steeply, and the ice is
discharged through fast-flowing ice streams or outlet glaciers,
in some cases into the sea or into ice shelves floating on the
sea. There are only two large ice sheets in the modern world,
on Greenland and Antarctica, the Antarctic ice sheet being
divided into East and West by the Transantarctic Mountains;
during glacial periods there were others.
Ice shelf
A floating ice sheet of considerable thickness attached to a
coast (usually of great horizontal extent with a level or gently
undulating surface); often a seaward extension of ice sheets.
(Climate) Impact assessment
The practice of identifying and evaluating the detrimental and
beneficial consequences of climate change on natural and
human systems.
(Climate) Impacts
Consequences of climate change on natural and human
systems. Depending on the consideration of adaptation, one
can distinguish between potential impacts and residual impacts.
Potential impacts: All impacts that may occur given a
projected change in climate, without considering adaptation.
Residual impacts: The impacts of climate change that
would occur after adaptation.
See also aggregate impacts, market impacts, and non-market
impacts.
Implementation
Implementation refers to the actions (legislation or regulations,
judicial decrees, or other actions) that governments take to
translate international accords into domestic law and policy.
It includes those events and activities that occur after the
issuing of authoritative public policy directives, which include
the effort to administer and the substantive impacts on people
and events. It is important to distinguish between the legal
implementation of international commitments (in national law)
and the effective implementation (measures that induce
changes in the behavior of target groups). Compliance is a
matter of whether and to what extent countries do adhere to
the provisions of the accord. Compliance focuses on not only
whether implementing measures are in effect, but also on
whether there is compliance with the implementing actions.
Compliance measures the degree to which the actors whose
behavior is targeted by the agreement, whether they are local
government units, corporations, organizations, or individuals,
conform to the implementing measures and obligations.
Implementation costs
Costs involved in the implementation of mitigation options.
These costs are associated with the necessary institutional
•
•

Climate Change 2001 Synthesis Report
IPCC Third Assessment Report
changes, information requirements, market size, opportunities
for technology gain and learning, and economic incentives
needed (grants, subsidies, and taxes).
Indigenous peoples
People whose ancestors inhabited a place or a country when
persons from another culture or ethnic background arrived on
the scene and dominated them through conquest, settlement,
or other means and who today live more in conformity with
their own social, economic, and cultural customs and traditions
than those of the country of which they now form a part (also
referred to as “native,” “aboriginal,” or “tribal” peoples).
Indirect aerosol effect
Aerosols may lead to an indirect radiative forcing of the climate
system through acting as condensation nuclei or modifying
the optical properties and lifetime of clouds. Two indirect
effects are distinguished:
First indirect effect: A radiative forcing induced by an increase
in anthropogenic aerosols which cause an initial increase
in droplet concentration and a decrease in droplet size for
fixed liquid water content, leading to an increase of cloud
albedo. This effect is also known as the “Twomey effect.”
This is sometimes referred to as the cloud albedo effect.
However this is highly misleading since the second indirect
effect also alters cloud albedo.
Second indirect effect: A radiative forcing induced by an
increase in anthropogenic aerosols which cause a decrease
in droplet size, reducing the precipitation efficiency, thereby
modifying the liquid water content, cloud thickness, and
cloud lifetime. This effect is also known as the “cloud
lifetime effect” or “Albrecht effect.”
Industrial Revolution
A period of rapid industrial growth with far-reaching social
and economic consequences, beginning in England during the
second half of the 18th century and spreading to Europe and
later to other countries including the United States. The
invention of the steam engine was an important trigger of this
development. The Industrial Revolution marks the beginning
of a strong increase in the use of fossil fuels and emission of,
in particular, fossil carbon dioxide. In this report, the terms
“pre-industrial” and “industrial” refer, somewhat arbitrarily,
to the periods before and after the year 1750, respectively.
Inertia
Delay, slowness, or resistance in the response of the climate,
biological, or human systems to factors that alter their rate of
change, including continuation of change in the system after
the cause of that change has been removed.
Infectious diseases
Any disease that can be transmitted from one person to another.
This may occur by direct physical contact, by common
handling of an object that has picked up infective organisms,
through a disease carrier, or by spread of infected droplets
coughed or exhaled into the air.
Infrared radiation
Radiation emitted by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere, and
clouds. It is also known as terrestrial or long-wave radiation.
Infrared radiation has a distinctive range of wavelengths
(“spectrum”) longer than the wavelength of the red color in
the visible part of the spectrum. The spectrum of infrared
radiation is practically distinct from that of solar or short-wave
radiation because of the difference in temperature between
the Sun and the Earth-atmosphere system.
Infrastructure
The basic equipment, utilities, productive enterprises,
installations, institutions, and services essential for the
development, operation, and growth of an organization, city,
or nation. For example, roads; schools; electric, gas, and water
utilities; transportation; communication; and legal systems
would be all considered as infrastructure.
Integrated assessment
A method of analysis that combines results and models from
the physical, biological, economic, and social sciences, and
the interactions between these components, in a consistent
framework, to evaluate the status and the consequences of
environmental change and the policy responses to it.
Interaction effect
The result or consequence of the interaction of climate change
policy instruments with existing domestic tax systems, including
both cost-increasing tax interaction and cost-reducing revenuerecycling
effect. The former reflects the impact that greenhouse
gas policies can have on the functioning of labor and capital markets
through their effects on real wages and the real return to capital.
By restricting the allowable greenhouse gas emissions, permits,
regulations, or a carbon tax raise the costs of production and the
prices of output, thus reducing the real return to labor and capital.
For policies that raise revenue for the government—carbon taxes
and auctioned permits—the revenues can be recycled to reduce
existing distortionary taxes. See also double dividend.
Internal variability
See climate variability.
International emissions/carbon/energy tax
See emissions tax.
International Energy Agency (IEA)
Paris-based energy forum established in 1974. It is linked with
the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
to enable member countries to take joint measures to meet oil
supply emergencies, to share energy information, to coordinate
their energy policies, and to cooperate in the development of
rational energy programs.
•
•

Annex B Glossary of Terms
International product and/or technology standards
See standards.
Introduced species
A species occurring in an area outside its historically known
natural range as a result of accidental dispersal by humans
(also referred to as “exotic species” or “alien species”).
Invasive species
An introduced species that invades natural habitats.
Isostatic land movements
Isostasy refers to the way in which the lithosphere and mantle
respond to changes in surface loads. When the loading of the
lithosphere is changed by alterations in land ice mass, ocean
mass, sedimentation, erosion, or mountain building, vertical
isostatic adjustment results, in order to balance the new load.
Joint Implementation (JI)
A market-based implementation mechanism defined in Article
of the Kyoto Protocol, allowing Annex I countries or
companies from these countries to implement projects jointly
that limit or reduce emissions, or enhance sinks, and to share
the Emissions Reduction Units. JI activity is also permitted in
Article 4.2(a) of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. See also Activities Implemented Jointly
and Kyoto Mechanisms.
Known technological options
Refer to technologies that exist in operation or pilot plant stage
today. It does not include any new technologies that will require
drastic technological breakthroughs.
Kyoto Mechanisms
Economic mechanisms based on market principles that Parties
to the Kyoto Protocol can use in an attempt to lessen the
potential economic impacts of greenhouse gas emissionreduction
requirements. They include Joint Implementation
(Article 6), the Clean Development Mechanism (Article 12),
and Emissions Trading (Article 17).
Kyoto Protocol
The Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was adopted at the Third Session
of the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC in 1997 in
Kyoto, Japan. It contains legally binding commitments, in addition
to those included in the UNFCCC. Countries included in Annex
B of the Protocol (most countries in the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development, and countries with
economies in transition) agreed to reduce their anthropogenic
greenhouse gas emissions (carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous
oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, and sulfur
hexafluoride) by at least 5% below 1990 levels in the
commitment period 2008 to 2012. The Kyoto Protocol has
not yet entered into force (September 2001).
La Niña
See El Niño Southern Oscillation.
Land use
The total of arrangements, activities, and inputs undertaken
in a certain land cover type (a set of human actions). The social
and economic purposes for which land is managed (e.g.,
grazing, timber extraction, and conservation).
Land-use change
A change in the use or management of land by humans, which
may lead to a change in land cover. Land cover and land-use
change may have an impact on the albedo, evapotranspiration,
sources, and sinks of greenhouse gases, or other properties of
the climate system, and may thus have an impact on climate,
locally or globally. See also the IPCC Special Report on Land
Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000b).
Landslide
A mass of material that has slipped downhill by gravity, often
assisted by water when the material is saturated; rapid
movement of a mass of soil, rock, or debris down a slope.
Leakage
The part of emissions reductions in Annex B countries that
may be offset by an increase of the emission in the nonconstrained
countries above their baseline levels. This can
occur through (i) relocation of energy-intensive production in
non-constrained regions; (ii) increased consumption of fossil
fuels in these regions through decline in the international price
of oil and gas triggered by lower demand for these energies;
and (iii) changes in incomes (thus in energy demand) because
of better terms of trade. Leakage also refers to the situation in
which a carbon sequestration activity (e.g., tree planting) on
one piece of land inadvertently, directly or indirectly, triggers
an activity, which in whole or part, counteracts the carbon
effects of the initial activity.
Lifetime
Lifetime is a general term used for various time scales
characterizing the rate of processes affecting the concentration
of trace gases. In general, lifetime denotes the average length
of time that an atom or molecule spends in a given reservoir,
such as the atmosphere or oceans. The following lifetimes
may be distinguished:
“Turnover time” (T) or “atmospheric lifetime” is the ratio
of the mass M of a reservoir (e.g., a gaseous compound in
the atmosphere) and the total rate of removal S from the
reservoir: T = M/S. For each removal process separate
turnover times can be defined. In soil carbon biology, this
is referred to as Mean Residence Time.
“Adjustment time,” “response time,” or “perturbation
lifetime” (Ta) is the time scale characterizing the decay of
an instantaneous pulse input into the reservoir. The term
adjustment time is also used to characterize the adjustment
•
•

Climate Change 2001 Synthesis Report
IPCC Third Assessment Report
of the mass of a reservoir following a step change in the
source strength. Half-life or decay constant is used to quantify
a first-order exponential decay process. See response time
for a different definition pertinent to climate variations.
The term “lifetime” is sometimes used, for simplicity, as a
surrogate for “adjustment time.”
In simple cases, where the global removal of the compound is
directly proportional to the total mass of the reservoir, the
adjustment time equals the turnover time: T = Ta. An example
is CFC-11 which is removed from the atmosphere only by
photochemical processes in the stratosphere. In more complicated
cases, where several reservoirs are involved or where the removal
is not proportional to the total mass, the equality T = Ta no
longer holds. Carbon dioxide is an extreme example. Its turnover
time is only about 4 years because of the rapid exchange between
atmosphere and the ocean and terrestrial biota. However, a
large part of that CO2 is returned to the atmosphere within a
few years. Thus, the adjustment time of CO2 in the atmosphere
is actually determined by the rate of removal of carbon from
the surface layer of the oceans into its deeper layers. Although
an approximate value of 100 years may be given for the
adjustment time of CO2 in the atmosphere, the actual
adjustment is faster initially and slower later on. In the case of
methane, the adjustment time is different from the turnover
time, because the removal is mainly through a chemical
reaction with the hydroxyl radical OH, the concentration of
which itself depends on the CH4 concentration. Therefore the
CH4 removal S is not proportional to its total mass M.
Lithosphere
The upper layer of the solid Earth, both continental and
oceanic, which is composed of all crustal rocks and the cold,
mainly elastic, part of the uppermost mantle. Volcanic activity,
although part of the lithosphere, is not considered as part of
the climate system, but acts as an external forcing factor.
Leapfrogging
Leapfrogging (or technological leapfrogging) refers to the
opportunities in developing countries to bypass several stages
of technology development, historically observed in industrialized
countries, and apply the most advanced presently available
technologies in the energy and other economic sectors, through
investments in technological development and capacity
building.
Level of scientific understanding
This is an index on a 4-step scale (High, Medium, Low, and
Very Low) designed to characterize the degree of scientific
understanding of the radiative forcing agents that affect climate
change. For each agent, the index represents a subjective
judgement about the reliability of the estimate of its forcing,
involving such factors as the assumptions necessary to evaluate
the forcing, the degree of knowledge of the physical/chemical
mechanisms determining the forcing, and the uncertainties
surrounding the quantitative estimate.
Local Agenda 21
Local Agenda 21s are the local plans for environment and
development that each local authority is meant to develop
through a consultative process with their populations, with
particular attention paid to involving women and youth. Many
local authorities have developed Local Agenda 21s through
consultative processes as a means of reorienting their policies,
plans, and operations towards the achievement of sustainable
development goals. The term comes from Chapter 28 of
Agenda 21—the document formally endorsed by all
government representatives attending the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development (also known
as the Earth Summit) in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.
Lock-in technologies and practices
Technologies and practices that have market advantages arising
from existing institutions, services, infrastructure, and available
resources; they are very difficult to change because of their
widespread use and the presence of associated infrastructure
and socio-cultural patterns.
Maladaptation
Any changes in natural or human systems that inadvertently
increase vulnerability to climatic stimuli; an adaptation that
does not succeed in reducing vulnerability but increases it
instead.
Malaria
Endemic or epidemic parasitic disease caused by species of
the genus Plasmodium (protozoa) and transmitted by mosquitoes
of the genus Anopheles; produces high fever attacks and
systemic disorders, and kills approximately 2 million people
every year.
Marginal cost pricing
The pricing of commercial goods and services such that the
price equals the additional cost that arises from the expansion
of production by one additional unit.
Market barriers
In the context of mitigation of climate change, conditions that
prevent or impede the diffusion of cost-effective technologies
or practices that would mitigate greenhouse gas emissions.
Market-based incentives
Measures intended to use price mechanisms (e.g., taxes and
tradable permits) to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Market impacts
Impacts that are linked to market transactions and directly
affect Gross Domestic Product (a country’s national
accounts)—for example, changes in the supply and price of
agricultural goods. See also non-market impacts.

Annex B Glossary of Terms
Market penetration
Market penetration is the share of a given market that is
provided by a particular good or service at a given time.
Market potential
The portion of the economic potential for greenhouse gas
emissions reductions or energy-efficiency improvements that
could be achieved under forecast market conditions, assuming
no new policies and measures. See also economic potential,
socio-economic potential, and technological potential.
Mass movement
Applies to all unit movements of land material propelled and
controlled by gravity.
Mean Sea Level (MSL)
Mean Sea Level is normally defined as the average relative
sea level over a period, such as a month or a year, long enough
to average out transients such as waves. See also sea-level
rise.
Methane (CH4)
A hydrocarbon that is a greenhouse gas produced through
anaerobic (without oxygen) decomposition of waste in
landfills, animal digestion, decomposition of animal wastes,
production and distribution of natural gas and oil, coal
production, and incomplete fossil-fuel combustion. Methane
is one of the six greenhouse gases to be mitigated under the
Kyoto Protocol.
Methane recovery
Method by which methane emissions (e.g., from coal mines
or waste sites) are captured and then reused either as a fuel or
for some other economic purpose (e.g., reinjection in oil or
gas reserves).
Meeting of the Parties (to the Kyoto Protocol) (MOP)
The Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change will serve as the Meeting of
the Parties (MOP), the supreme body of the Kyoto Protocol,
but only Parties to the Kyoto Protocol may participate in
deliberations and make decisions. Until the Protocol enters
into force, MOP cannot meet.
Mitigation
An anthropogenic intervention to reduce the sources or
enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases.
Mitigative capacity
The social, political, and economic structures and conditions
that are required for effective mitigation.
Mixed layer
The upper region of the ocean well-mixed by interaction with
the overlying atmosphere.
Mixing ratio
See mole fraction.
Model hierarchy
See climate model.
Mole fraction
Mole fraction, or mixing ratio, is the ratio of the number of
moles of a constituent in a given volume to the total number
of moles of all constituents in that volume. It is usually reported
for dry air. Typical values for long-lived greenhouse gases are
in the order of mmol/mol (parts per million: ppm), nmol/mol
(parts per billion: ppb), and fmol/mol (parts per trillion: ppt).
Mole fraction differs from volume mixing ratio, often expressed
in ppmv, etc., by the corrections for non-ideality of gases. This
correction is significant relative to measurement precision for
many greenhouse gases (Schwartz and Warneck, 1995).
Monsoon
Wind in the general atmospheric circulation typified by a
seasonal persistent wind direction and by a pronounced change
in direction from one season to the next.
Montane
The biogeographic zone made up of relatively moist, cool
upland slopes below timberline and characterized by the
presence of large evergreen trees as a dominant life form.
Montreal Protocol
The Montreal Protocol on substances that deplete the ozone
layer was adopted in Montreal in 1987, and subsequently
adjusted and amended in London (1990), Copenhagen (1992),
Vienna (1995), Montreal (1997), and Beijing (1999). It
controls the consumption and production of chlorine- and
bromine-containing chemicals that destroy stratospheric ozone,
such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), methyl chloroform,
carbon tetrachloride, and many others.
Morbidity
Rate of occurrence of disease or other health disorder within a
population, taking account of the age-specific morbidity rates.
Health outcomes include chronic disease incidence/prevalence,
rates of hospitalization, primary care consultations, disability-days
(i.e., days when absent from work), and prevalence of symptoms.
Mortality
Rate of occurrence of death within a population within a
specified time period; calculation of mortality takes account
of age-specific death rates, and can thus yield measures of life
expectancy and the extent of premature death.
Net Biome Production (NBP)
Net gain or loss of carbon from a region. NBP is equal to the
Net Ecosystem Production minus the carbon lost due to a
disturbance (e.g., a forest fire or a forest harvest).

Climate Change 2001 Synthesis Report
IPCC Third Assessment Report
Net carbon dioxide emissions
Difference between sources and sinks of carbon dioxide in a
given period and specific area or region.
Net Ecosystem Production (NEP)
Net gain or loss of carbon from an ecosystem. NEP is equal to
the Net Primary Production minus the carbon lost through
heterotrophic respiration.
Net Primary Production (NPP)
The increase in plant biomass or carbon of a unit of a landscape.
NPP is equal to the Gross Primary Production minus carbon
lost through autotrophic respiration.
Nitrogen fertilization
Enhancement of plant growth through the addition of nitrogen
compounds. In IPCC assessments, this typically refers to
fertilization from anthropogenic sources of nitrogen such as
human-made fertilizers and nitrogen oxides released from
burning fossil fuels.
Nitrogen oxides (NOx)
Any of several oxides of nitrogen.
Nitrous oxide (N2O)
A powerful greenhouse gas emitted through soil cultivation
practices, especially the use of commercial and organic
fertilizers, fossil-fuel combustion, nitric acid production, and
biomass burning. One of the six greenhouse gases to be curbed
under the Kyoto Protocol.
Non-point-source pollution
Pollution from sources that cannot be defined as discrete
points, such as areas of crop production, timber, surface
mining, disposal of refuse, and construction. See also pointsource
pollution.
No-regrets opportunities
See no-regrets policy.
No-regret options
See no-regrets policy.
No-regrets policy
One that would generate net social benefits whether or not
there is climate change. No-regrets opportunities for
greenhouse gas emissions reduction are defined as those
options whose benefits such as reduced energy costs and
reduced emissions of local/regional pollutants equal or exceed
their costs to society, excluding the benefits of avoided climate
change. No-regrets potential is defined as the gap between
the market potential and the socio-economic potential.
No-regrets potential
See no-regrets policy.
Non-Annex B countries/Parties
The countries that are not included in Annex B in the Kyoto
Protocol. See also Annex B countries.
Non-Annex I countries/Parties
The countries that have ratified or acceded to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change that are
not included in Annex I of the Climate Convention. See also
Annex I countries.
Non-linearity
A process is called “non-linear” when there is no simple
proportional relation between cause and effect. The climate
system contains many such non-linear processes, resulting in
a system with a potentially very complex behavior. Such
complexity may lead to rapid climate change.
Non-market impacts
Impacts that affect ecosystems or human welfare, but that are
not directly linked to market transactions—for example, an
increased risk of premature death. See also market impacts.
North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO)
The North Atlantic Oscillation consists of opposing variations
of barometric pressure near Iceland and near the Azores. On
average, a westerly current, between the Icelandic low pressure
area and the Azores high pressure area, carries cyclones with
their associated frontal systems towards Europe. However,
the pressure difference between Iceland and the Azores fluctuates
on time scales of days to decades, and can be reversed at times.
It is the dominant mode of winter climate variability in the North
Atlantic region, ranging from central North America to Europe.
Ocean conveyor belt
The theoretical route by which water circulates around the entire
global ocean, driven by wind and the thermohaline circulation.
Opportunity
An opportunity is a situation or circumstance to decrease the
gap between the market potential of any technology or practice
and the economic potential, socio-economic potential, or
technological potential.
Opportunity costs
The cost of an economic activity forgone by the choice of
another activity.
Optimal policy
A policy is assumed to be “optimal” if marginal abatement costs
are equalized across countries, thereby minimizing total costs.
Organic aerosol
Aerosol particles consisting predominantly of organic compounds,
mainly C, H, and O, and lesser amounts of other elements
(Charlson and Heintzenberg, 1995). See carbonaceous aerosol.

Annex B Glossary of Terms
Ozone (O3)
Ozone, the triatomic form of oxygen (O3), is a gaseous atmospheric
constituent. In the troposphere it is created both naturally and by
photochemical reactions involving gases resulting from human
activities (photochemical “smog”). In high concentrations,
tropospheric ozone can be harmful to a wide-range of living
organisms. Tropospheric ozone acts as a greenhouse gas. In the
stratosphere, ozone is created by the interaction between solar
ultraviolet radiation and molecular oxygen (O2). Stratospheric
ozone plays a decisive role in the stratospheric radiative balance.
Its concentration is highest in the ozone layer. Depletion of
stratospheric ozone, due to chemical reactions that may be enhanced
by climate change, results in an increased ground-level flux of
ultraviolet-B radiation. See also Montreal Protocol and ozone layer.
Ozone hole
See ozone layer.
Ozone layer
The stratosphere contains a layer in which the concentration
of ozone is greatest, the so-called ozone layer. The layer
extends from about 12 to 40 km. The ozone concentration
reaches a maximum between about 20 and 25 km. This layer
is being depleted by human emissions of chlorine and bromine
compounds. Every year, during the Southern Hemisphere
spring, a very strong depletion of the ozone layer takes place
over the Antarctic region, also caused by human-made chlorine
and bromine compounds in combination with the specific
meteorological conditions of that region. This phenomenon is
called the ozone hole.
Parameterization
In climate models, this term refers to the technique of representing
processes, that cannot be explicitly resolved at the spatial or
temporal resolution of the model (sub-grid scale processes),
by relationships between the area- or time-averaged effect of
such sub-grid-scale processes and the larger scale flow.
Pareto criterion/Pareto optimum
A requirement or status that an individual’s welfare could not be
further improved without making others in the society worse off.
Perfluorocarbons (PFCs)
Among the six greenhouse gases to be abated under the Kyoto
Protocol. These are by-products of aluminum smelting and
uranium enrichment. They also replace chlorofluorocarbons
in manufacturing semiconductors. The Global Warming
Potential of PFCs is 6,500–9,200 times that of carbon dioxide.
Permafrost
Perennially frozen ground that occurs wherever the temperature
remains below 0°C for several years.
Perturbation lifetime
See lifetime.
Photosynthesis
The process by which plants take carbon dioxide (CO2) from
the air (or bicarbonate in water) to build carbohydrates, releasing
oxygen (O2) in the process. There are several pathways of
photosynthesis with different responses to atmospheric CO2
concentrations. See also carbon dioxide fertilization.
Phytoplankton
The plant forms of plankton (e.g., diatoms). Phytoplankton
are the dominant plants in the sea, and are the bast of the entire
marine food web. These single-celled organisms are the
principal agents for photosynthetic carbon fixation in the
ocean. See also zooplankton.
Plankton
Aquatic organisms that drift or swim weakly. See also
phytoplankton and zooplankton.
Point-source pollution
Pollution resulting from any confined, discrete source, such
as a pipe, ditch, tunnel, well, container, concentrated animalfeeding
operation, or floating craft. See also non-point-source
pollution.
Policies and measures
In United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
parlance, “policies” are actions that can be taken and/or mandated
by a government—often in conjunction with business and industry
within its own country, as well as with other countries—to
accelerate the application and use of measures to curb
greenhouse gas emissions. “Measures” are technologies,
processes, and practices used to implement policies, which, if
employed, would reduce greenhouse gas emissions below
anticipated future levels. Examples might include carbon or
other energy taxes, standardized fuel-efficiency standards for
automobiles, etc. “Common and coordinated” or “harmonized”
policies refer to those adopted jointly by Parties.
Pool
See reservoir.
Post-glacial rebound
The vertical movement of the continents and sea floor
following the disappearance and shrinking of ice sheets—for
example, since the Last Glacial Maximum (21 ky BP). The
rebound is an isostatic land movement.
Precursors
Atmospheric compounds which themselves are not greenhouse
gases or aerosols, but which have an effect on greenhouse gas
or aerosol concentrations by taking part in physical or chemical
processes regulating their production or destruction rates.
Pre-industrial
See Industrial Revolution.

Climate Change 2001 Synthesis Report
IPCC Third Assessment Report
Present value cost
The sum of all costs over all time periods, with future costs
discounted.
Primary energy
Energy embodied in natural resources (e.g., coal, crude oil,
sunlight, uranium) that has not undergone any anthropogenic
conversion or transformation.
Private cost
Categories of costs influencing an individual’s decision making
are referred to as private costs. See also social cost and total cost.
Profile
A smoothly changing set of concentrations representing a
possible pathway towards stabilization. The word “profile”is
used to distinguish such pathways from emissions pathways,
which are usually referred to as “scenarios.”
Projection (generic)
A projection is a potential future evolution of a quantity or set
of quantities, often computed with the aid of a model.
Projections are distinguished from “predictions” in order to
emphasize that projections involve assumptions concerning,
for example, future socio-economic and technological
developments that may or may not be realized, and are
therefore subject to substantial uncertainty. See also climate
projection and climate prediction.
Proxy
A proxy climate indicator is a local record that is interpreted,
using physical and biophysical principles, to represent some
combination of climate-related variations back in time.
Climate-related data derived in this way are referred to as proxy
data. Examples of proxies are tree ring records, characteristics
of corals, and various data derived from ice cores.
Purchasing Power Parity (PPP)
Estimates of Gross Domestic Product based on the purchasing
power of currencies rather than on current exchange rates. Such
estimates are a blend of extrapolated and regression-based
numbers, using the results of the International Comparison
Program. PPP estimates tend to lower per capita GDPs in
industrialized countries and raise per capita GDPs in developing
countries. PPP is also an acronym for polluter-pays-principle.
Radiative balance
See energy balance.
Radiative forcing
Radiative forcing is the change in the net vertical irradiance
(expressed in Wm-2) at the tropopause due to an internal change
or a change in the external forcing of the climate system, such as,
for example, a change in the concentration of carbon dioxide
or the output of the Sun. Usually radiative forcing is computed
after allowing for stratospheric temperatures to readjust to
radiative equilibrium, but with all tropospheric properties held
fixed at their unperturbed values.
Radiative forcing scenario
A plausible representation of the future development of
radiative forcing associated, for example, with changes in
atmospheric composition or land-use change, or with external
factors such as variations in solar activity. Radiative forcing
scenarios can be used as input into simplified climate models
to compute climate projections.
Rangeland
Unimproved grasslands, shrublands, savannahs, and tundra.
Regeneration
The renewal of a stand of trees through either natural means
(seeded onsite or adjacent stands or deposited by wind, birds,
or animals) or artificial means (by planting seedlings or direct
seeding).
Rapid climate change
The non-linearity of the climate system may lead to rapid
climate change, sometimes called abrupt events or even
surprises. Some such abrupt events may be imaginable, such
as a dramatic reorganization of the thermohaline circulation,
rapid deglaciation, or massive melting of permafrost leading
to fast changes in the carbon cycle. Others may be truly
unexpected, as a consequence of a strong, rapidly changing,
forcing of a non-linear system.
Rebound effect
Occurs because, for example, an improvement in motor
efficiency lowers the cost per kilometer driven; it has the
perverse effect of encouraging more trips.
Reference scenario
See baseline.
Reforestation
Planting of forests on lands that have previously contained
forests but that have been converted to some other use. For a
discussion of the term forest and related terms such as
afforestation, reforestation, and deforestation, see the IPCC
Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry
(IPCC, 2000b).
Regulatory measures
Rules or codes enacted by governments that mandate product
specifications or process performance characteristics. See also
standards.
Reinsurance
The transfer of a portion of primary insurance risks to a secondary
tier of insurers (reinsurers); essentially “insurance for insurers.”

Annex B Glossary of Terms
Relative sea level
Sea level measured by a tide gauge with respect to the land
upon which it is situated. See also Mean Sea Level.
(Relative) Sea level secular change
Long-term changes in relative sea level caused by either
eustatic changes (e.g., brought about by thermal expansion)
or changes in vertical land movements.
Renewables
Energy sources that are, within a short time frame relative to
the Earth’s natural cycles, sustainable, and include non-carbon
technologies such as solar energy, hydropower, and wind, as
well as carbon-neutral technologies such as biomass.
Research, development, and demonstration
Scientific and/or technical research and development of new
production processes or products, coupled with analysis and
measures that provide information to potential users regarding
the application of the new product or process; demonstration
tests; and feasibility of applying these products processes via
pilot plants and other pre-commercial applications.
Reserves
Refer to those occurrences that are identified and measured
as economically and technically recoverable with current
technologies and prices. See also resources.
Reservoir
A component of the climate system, other than the atmosphere,
which has the capacity to store, accumulate, or release a
substance of concern (e.g., carbon, a greenhouse gas, or a
precursor). Oceans, soils, and forests are examples of
reservoirs of carbon. Pool is an equivalent term (note that the
definition of pool often includes the atmosphere). The absolute
quantity of substance of concerns, held within a reservoir at a
specified time, is called the stock. The term also means an
artificial or natural storage place for water, such as a lake,
pond, or aquifer, from which the water may be withdrawn for
such purposes as irrigation, water supply, or irrigation.
Resilience
Amount of change a system can undergo without changing
state.
Resource base
Resource base includes both reserves and resources.
Resources
Resources are those occurrences with less certain geological
and/or economic characteristics, but which are considered
potentially recoverable with foreseeable technological and
economic developments.
Respiration
The process whereby living organisms converts organic matter
to carbon dioxide, releasing energy and consuming oxygen.
Response time
The response time or adjustment time is the time needed for
the climate system or its components to re-equilibrate to a new
state, following a forcing resulting from external and internal
processes or feedbacks. It is very different for various components
of the climate system. The response time of the troposphere is
relatively short, from days to weeks, whereas the stratosphere comes
into equilibrium on a time scale of typically a few months. Due
to their large heat capacity, the oceans have a much longer response
time, typically decades, but up to centuries or millennia. The
response time of the strongly coupled surface-troposphere system
is, therefore, slow compared to that of the stratosphere, and
mainly determined by the oceans. The biosphere may respond
fast (e.g., to droughts), but also very slowly to imposed changes.
See lifetime for a different definition of response time pertinent
to the rate of processes affecting the concentration of trace gases.
Revenue recycling
See interaction effect.
Runoff
That part of precipitation that does not evaporate. In some
countries, runoff implies surface runoff only.
S profiles
The carbon dioxide concentration profiles leading to stabilization
defined in the IPCC 1994 assessment (Enting et al., 1994;
Schimel et al., 1995). For any given stabilization level, these
profiles span a wide range of possibilities. The S stands for
“Stabilization.” See also WRE profiles.
Safe-landing approach
See tolerable windows approach.
Salinization
The accumulation of salts in soils.
Saltwater intrusion/encroachment
Displacement of fresh surfacewater or groundwater by the
advance of saltwater due to its greater density, usually in coastal
and estuarine areas.
Scenario (generic)
A plausible and often simplified description of how the future
may develop, based on a coherent and internally consistent set
of assumptions about key driving forces (e.g., rate of technology
change, prices) and relationships. Scenarios are neither predictions
nor forecasts and sometimes may be based on a “narrative
storyline.” Scenarios may be derived from projections, but are
often based on additional information from other sources. See
also SRES scenarios, climate scenario, and emission scenarios.

Climate Change 2001 Synthesis Report
IPCC Third Assessment Report
Sea-level rise
An increase in the mean level of the ocean. Eustatic sea-level
rise is a change in global average sea level brought about by
an alteration to the volume of the world ocean. Relative sealevel
rise occurs where there is a net increase in the level of
the ocean relative to local land movements. Climate modelers
largely concentrate on estimating eustatic sea-level change.
Impact researchers focus on relative sea-level change.
Seawall
A human-made wall or embankment along a shore to prevent
wave erosion.
Semi-arid regions
Ecosystems that have more than 250 mm precipitation per year
but are not highly productive; usually classified as rangelands.
Sensitivity
Sensitivity is the degree to which a system is affected, either
adversely or beneficially, by climate-related stimuli. The effect
may be direct (e.g., a change in crop yield in response to a change
in the mean, range, or variability of temperature) or indirect
(e.g., damages caused by an increase in the frequency of coastal
flooding due to sea-level rise). See also climate sensitivity.
Sequential decision making
Stepwise decision making aiming to identify short-term strategies
in the face of long-term uncertainties, by incorporating additional
information over time and making mid-course corrections.
Sequestration
The process of increasing the carbon content of a carbon
reservoir other than the atmosphere. Biological approaches
to sequestration include direct removal of carbon dioxide from
the atmosphere through land-use change, afforestation,
reforestation, and practices that enhance soil carbon in agriculture.
Physical approaches include separation and disposal of carbon
dioxide from flue gases or from processing fossil fuels to
produce hydrogen- and carbon dioxide-rich fractions and longterm
storage in underground in depleted oil and gas reservoirs,
coal seams, and saline aquifers. See also uptake.
Silt
Unconsolidated or loose sedimentary material whose constituent
rock particles are finer than grains of sand and larger than
clay particles.
Silviculture
Development and care of forests.
Sink
Any process, activity or mechanism that removes a greenhouse
gas, an aerosol, or a precursor of a greenhouse gas or aerosol
from the atmosphere.
Snowpacks
A seasonal accumulation of slow-melting snow.
Social cost
The social cost of an activity includes the value of all the resources
used in its provision. Some of these are priced and others are not.
Non-priced resources are referred to as externalities. It is the
sum of the costs of these externalities and the priced resources
that makes up the social cost. See also private cost and total cost.
Socio-economic potential
The socio-economic potential represents the level of greenhouse
gas mitigation that would be approached by overcoming social
and cultural obstacles to the use of technologies that are costeffective.
See also economic potential, market potential, and
technology potential.
Soil moisture
Water stored in or at the land surface and available for evaporation.
Solar activity
The Sun exhibits periods of high activity observed in numbers
of sunspots, as well as radiative output, magnetic activity, and
emission of high energy particles. These variations take place
on a range of time scales from millions of years to minutes.
See also solar cycle.
Solar (“11 year”) cycle
A quasi-regular modulation of solar activity with varying
amplitude and a period of between 9 and 13 years.
Solar radiation
Radiation emitted by the Sun. It is also referred to as shortwave
radiation. Solar radiation has a distinctive range of
wavelengths (spectrum) determined by the temperature of the
Sun. See also infrared radiation.
Soot particles
Particles formed during the quenching of gases at the outer edge
of flames of organic vapors, consisting predominantly of carbon,
with lesser amounts of oxygen and hydrogen present as carboxyl
and phenolic groups and exhibiting an imperfect graphitic structure
(Charlson and Heintzenberg, 1995). See also black carbon.
Source
Any process, activity, or mechanism that releases a greenhouse
gas, an aerosol, or a precursor of a greenhouse gas or aerosol
into the atmosphere.
Southern Oscillation
See El Niño Southern Oscillation.
Spatial and temporal scales
Climate may vary on a large range of spatial and temporal scales.
Spatial scales may range from local (less than 100,000 km2),

Annex B Glossary of Terms
through regional (100,000 to 10 million km2) to continental
(10 to 100 million km2). Temporal scales may range from
seasonal to geological (up to hundreds of millions of years).
Spill-over effect
The economic effects of domestic or sectoral mitigation measures
on other countries or sectors. In this report, no assessment is made
on environmental spillover effects. Spillover effects can be positive
or negative and include effects on trade, carbon leakage, transfer,
and diffusion of environmentally sound technology and other issues.
SRES scenarios
SRES scenarios are emissions scenarios developed by
Nakicenovic et al. (2000) and used, among others, as a basis
for the climate projections in the IPCC WGI contribution to
the Third Assessment Report (IPCC, 2001a). The following
terms are relevant for a better understanding of the structure
and use of the set of SRES scenarios:
(Scenario) Family: Scenarios that have a similar demographic,
societal, economic, and technical-change storyline. Four
scenario families comprise the SRES scenario set: A1, A2,
B1, and B2.
(Scenario) Group: Scenarios within a family that reflect a
consistent variation of the storyline. The A1 scenario family
includes four groups designated as A1T, A1C, A1G, and A1B
that explore alternative structures of future energy systems.
In the Summary for Policymakers of Nakicenovic et al.
(2000), the A1C and A1G groups have been combined into
one “Fossil-Intensive” A1FI scenario group. The other three
scenario families consist of one group each. The SRES scenario
set reflected in the Summary for Policymakers of Nakicenovic
et al. (2000) thus consist of six distinct scenario groups, all
of which are equally sound and together capture the range of
uncertainties associated with driving forces and emissions.
Illustrative Scenario: A scenario that is illustrative for each
of the six scenario groups reflected in the Summary for
Policymakers of Nakicenovic et al. (2000). They include
four revised scenario markers for the scenario groups A1B,
A2, B1, B2, and two additional scenarios for the A1FI and
A1T groups. All scenario groups are equally sound.
(Scenario) Marker: A scenario that was originally posted in
draft form on the SRES website to represent a given scenario
family. The choice of markers was based on which of the initial
quantifications best reflected the storyline, and the features
of specific models. Markers are no more likely than other
scenarios, but are considered by the SRES writing team as
illustrative of a particular storyline. They are included in
revised form in Nakicenovic et al. (2000). These scenarios
have received the closest scrutiny of the entire writing team
and via the SRES open process. Scenarios have also been
selected to illustrate the other two scenario groups.
(Scenario) Storyline: A narrative description of a scenario
(or family of scenarios) highlighting the main scenario
characteristics, relationships between key driving forces,
and the dynamics of their evolution.
Stabilization
The achievement of stabilization of atmospheric concentrations
of one or more greenhouse gases (e.g., carbon dioxide or a
CO2-equivalent basket of greenhouse gases).
Stabilization analysis
In this report, this refers to analyses or scenarios that address
the stabilization of the concentration of greenhouse gases.
Stabilization scenarios
See stabilization analysis.
Stakeholders
Person or entity holding grants, concessions, or any other type
of value that would be affected by a particular action or policy.
Standards
Set of rules or codes mandating or defining product performance
(e.g., grades, dimensions, characteristics, test methods, and
rules for use). International product and/or technology or
performance standards establish minimum requirements for
affected products and/or technologies in countries where they
are adopted. The standards reduce greenhouse gas emissions
associated with the manufacture or use of the products and/or
application of the technology. See also regulatory measures.
Stimuli (climate-related)
All the elements of climate change, including mean climate
characteristics, climate variability, and the frequency and
magnitude of extremes.
Stock
See reservoir.
Storm surge
The temporary increase, at a particular locality, in the height
of the sea due to extreme meteorological conditions (low
atmospheric pressure and/or strong winds). The storm surge
is defined as being the excess above the level expected from
the tidal variation alone at that time and place.
Storyline
See SRES scenarios.
Streamflow
Water within a river channel, usually expressed in m3 sec-1.
Stratosphere
The highly stratified region of the atmosphere above the
troposphere extending from about 10 km (ranging from 9 km in
high latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on average) to about 50 km.
Structural change
Changes, for example, in the relative share of Gross Domestic
Product produced by the industrial, agricultural, or services sectors
•
•
•
•
•

Climate Change 2001 Synthesis Report
IPCC Third Assessment Report
of an economy; or more generally, systems transformations
whereby some components are either replaced or potentially
substituted by other ones.
Submergence
A rise in the water level in relation to the land, so that areas of
formerly dry land become inundated; it results either from a
sinking of the land or from a rise of the water level.
Subsidence
The sudden sinking or gradual downward settling of the Earth’s
surface with little or no horizontal motion.
Subsidy
Direct payment from the government to an entity, or a tax reduction
to that entity, for implementing a practice the government wishes
to encourage. Greenhouse gas emissions can be reduced by
lowering existing subsidies that have the effect of raising
emissions, such as subsidies to fossil-fuel use, or by providing
subsidies for practices that reduce emissions or enhance sinks
(e.g., for insulation of buildings or planting trees).
Sulfur hexafluoride (SF6)
One of the six greenhouse gases to be curbed under the Kyoto
Protocol. It is largely used in heavy industry to insulate highvoltage
equipment and to assist in the manufacturing of cablecooling
systems. Its Global Warming Potential is 23,900.
Sunspots
Small dark areas on the Sun. The number of sunspots is higher
during periods of high solar activity, and varies in particular
with the solar cycle.
Surface runoff
The water that travels over the soil surface to the nearest surface
stream; runoff of a drainage basin that has not passed beneath
the surface since precipitation.
Sustainable development
Development that meets the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs.
Targets and time tables
A target is the reduction of a specific percentage of greenhouse
gas emissions from a baseline date (e.g., “below 1990 levels”)
to be achieved by a set date or time table (e.g., 2008 to 2012).
For example, under the Kyoto Protocol’s formula, the European
Union has agreed to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by
% below 1990 levels by the 2008 to 2012 commitment period.
These targets and time tables are, in effect, an emissions cap
on the total amount of greenhouse gas emissions that can be
emitted by a country or region in a given time period.
Tax-interaction effect
See interaction effect.
Technological potential
The amount by which it is possible to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions or improve energy efficiency by implementing a technology
or practice that has already been demonstrated. See also economic
potential, market potential, and socio-economic potential.
Technology
A piece of equipment or a technique for performing a particular
activity.
Technology or performance standard
See standards.
Technology transfer
The broad set of processes that cover the exchange of knowledge,
money, and goods among different stakeholders that lead to the
spreading of technology for adapting to or mitigating climate
change. As a generic concept, the term is used to encompass
both diffusion of technologies and technological cooperation
across and within countries.
Thermal erosion
The erosion of ice-rich permafrost by the combined thermal
and mechanical action of moving water.
Thermal expansion
In connection with sea level, this refers to the increase in volume
(and decrease in density) that results from warming water. A
warming of the ocean leads to an expansion of the ocean
volume and hence an increase in sea level.
Thermohaline circulation
Large-scale density-driven circulation in the ocean, caused by
differences in temperature and salinity. In the North Atlantic, the
thermohaline circulation consists of warm surface water flowing
northward and cold deepwater flowing southward, resulting
in a net poleward transport of heat. The surface water sinks in
highly restricted sinking regions located in high latitudes.
Thermokarst
Irregular, hummocky topography in frozen ground caused by
melting of ice.
Tide gauge
A device at a coastal location (and some deep sea locations)
which continuously measures the level of the sea with respect
to the adjacent land. Time-averaging of the sea level so
recorded gives the observed relative sea level secular changes.
Time scale
Characteristic time for a process to be expressed. Since many
processes exibit most of their effects early, and then have a long

Annex B Glossary of Terms
period during which they gradually approach full expression,
for the purpose of this report the time scale is numerically defined
as the time required for a perturbation in a process to show at
least half of its final effect.
Tolerable-windows approach
These approaches analyze greenhouse gas emissions as they
would be constrained by adopting a long-term climate—rather
than greenhouse gas concentration stabilization—target (e.g.,
expressed in terms of temperature or sea level changes or the
rate of such changes). The main objective of these approaches
is to evaluate the implications of such long-term targets for shortor
medium-term “tolerable” ranges of global greenhouse gas
emissions. Also referred to as safe-landing approaches.
Top-down models
The terms “top” and “bottom” are shorthand for aggregate
and disaggregated models. The top-down label derives from
how modelers applied macro-economic theory and
econometric techniques to historical data on consumption,
prices, incomes, and factor costs to model final demand for
goods and services, and supply from main sectors, like the
energy sector, transportation, agriculture, and industry.
Therefore, top-down models evaluate the system from
aggregate economic variables, as compared to bottom-up
models that consider technological options or project specific
climate change mitigation policies. Some technology data
were, however, integrated into top-down analysis and so the
distinction is not that clear-cut.
Total cost
All items of cost added together. The total cost to society is
made up of both the external cost and the private cost, which
together are defined as social cost.
Trade effects
Economic impacts of changes in the purchasing power of a
bundle of exported goods of a country for bundles of goods
imported from its trade partners. Climate policies change the
relative production costs and may change terms of trade
substantially enough to change the ultimate economic balance.
Transient climate response
The globally averaged surface air temperature increase, averaged
over a 20-year period, centered at the time of CO2 doubling
(i.e., at year 70 in a 1% per year compound CO2 increase
experiment with a global coupled climate model).
Tropopause
The boundary between the troposphere and the stratosphere.
Troposphere
The lowest part of the atmosphere from the surface to about
km in altitude in mid-latitudes (ranging from 9 km in high
latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on average) where clouds and
“weather” phenomena occur. In the troposphere, temperatures
generally decrease with height.
Tundra
A treeless, level, or gently undulating plain characteristic of
arctic and subarctic regions.
Turnover time
See lifetime.
Ultraviolet (UV)-B radiation
Solar radiation within a wavelength range of 280-320 nm,
the greater part of which is absorbed by stratospheric ozone.
Enhanced UV-B radiation suppresses the immune system and
can have other adverse effects on living organisms.
Uncertainty
An expression of the degree to which a value (e.g., the future
state of the climate system) is unknown. Uncertainty can result
from lack of information or from disagreement about what is
known or even knowable. It may have many types of sources,
from quantifiable errors in the data to ambiguously defined
concepts or terminology, or uncertain projections of human
behavior. Uncertainty can therefore be represented by quantitative
measures (e.g., a range of values calculated by various models)
or by qualitative statements (e.g., reflecting the judgment of a
team of experts). See Moss and Schneider (2000).
Undernutrition
The result of food intake that is insufficient to meet dietary
energy requirements continuously, poor absorption, and/or
poor biological use of nutrients consumed.
Unique and threatened systems
Entities that are confined to a relatively narrow geographical
range but can affect other, often larger entities beyond their
range; narrow geographical range points to sensitivity to
environmental variables, including climate, and therefore
attests to potential vulnerability to climate change.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC)
The Convention was adopted on 9 May 1992 in New York
and signed at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro by
more than 150 countries and the European Community. Its
ultimate objective is the “stabilization of greenhouse gas
concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent
dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate
system.” It contains commitments for all Parties. Under the
Convention, Parties included in Annex I aim to return
greenhouse gas emissions not controlled by the Montreal
Protocol to 1990 levels by the year 2000. The Convention
entered into force in March 1994. See also Kyoto Protocol
and Conference of the Parties (COP).

Climate Change 2001 Synthesis Report
IPCC Third Assessment Report
Uptake
The addition of a substance of concern to a reservoir. The
uptake of carbon-containing substances, in particular carbon
dioxide, is often called (carbon) sequestration. See also
sequestration.
Upwelling
Transport of deeper water to the surface, usually caused by
horizontal movements of surface water.
Urbanization
The conversion of land from a natural state or managed natural
state (such as agriculture) to cities; a process driven by net
rural-to-urban migration through which an increasing percentage
of the population in any nation or region come to live in
settlements that are defined as “urban centres.”
Value added
The net output of a sector after adding up all outputs and
subtracting intermediate inputs.
Values
Worth, desirability, or utility based on individual preferences.
The total value of any resource is the sum of the values of the
different individuals involved in the use of the resource. The
values, which are the foundation of the estimation of costs,
are measured in terms of the willingness to pay (WTP) by
individuals to receive the resource or by the willingness of
individuals to accept payment (WTA) to part with the resource.
Vector
An organism, such as an insect, that transmits a pathogen from
one host to another. See also vector-borne diseases.
Vector-borne diseases
Disease that is transmitted between hosts by a vector organism
such as a mosquito or tick (e.g., malaria, dengue fever, and
leishmaniasis).
Volume mixing ratio
See mole fraction.
Voluntary agreement
An agreement between a government authority and one or more
private parties, as well as a unilateral commitment that is
recognized by the public authority, to achieve environmental
objectives or to improve environmental performance beyond
compliance.
Vulnerability
The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to
cope with, adverse effects of climate change, including climate
variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a function of the
character, magnitude, and rate of climate variation to which a
system is exposed, its sensitivity, and its adaptive capacity.
Water stress
A country is water-stressed if the available freshwater supply
relative to water withdrawals acts as an important constraint
on development. Withdrawals exceeding 20% of renewable
water supply has been used as an indicator of water stress.
Water-use efficiency
Carbon gain in photosynthesis per unit water lost in
evapotranspiration. It can be expressed on a short-term basis
as the ratio of photosynthetic carbon gain per unit transpirational
water loss, or on a seasonal basis as the ratio of net primary
production or agricultural yield to the amount of available water.
Water withdrawal
Amount of water extracted from water bodies.
WRE profiles
The carbon dioxide concentration profiles leading to stabilization
defined by Wigley, Richels, and Edmonds (1996) whose initials
provide the acronym. For any given stabilization level, these
profiles span a wide range of possibilities. See also S profiles.
Zooplankton
The animal forms of plankton. They consume phytoplankton
or other zooplankton. See also phytoplankton.