
Annex I

Activities Implemented Jointly (AIJ)
The pilot phase for Joint Implementation, as defined in Article
.2(a) of the UNFCCC, which allows for project activity among
developed countries (and their companies) and between developed
and developing countries (and their companies). AIJ is intended
to allow parties to the UNFCCC to gain experience in jointly
implemented projects. AIJ under the pilot phase do not lead to any
credits. Decisions remain about the future of AIJ projects and how
they may relate to the Kyoto Mechanisms. As a simple form of
tradable permits, AIJ and other market-based schemes represent
potential mechanisms for stimulating additional resource flows for
reducing emissions. See also Clean Development Mechanism, and
Emissions Trading.
Actual net greenhouse gas removals by sinks
The sum of the verifiable changes in carbon stocks in the carbon
pools within the project boundary of an afforestation or reforestation
project, minus the increase in GHG emissions as a result of the
implementation of the project activity. The term stems from the Clean
Development Mechanism (CDM) afforestation and reforestation
modalities and procedures.
Adaptation
Initiatives and measures to reduce the vulnerability of natural and
human systems against actual or expected climate change effects.
Various types of adaptation exist, e.g. anticipatory and reactive,
private and public, and autonomous and planned. Examples are
raising river or coastal dikes, the substitution of more temperatureshock
resistant plants for sensitive ones, etc.
Adaptive capacity
The whole of capabilities, resources and institutions of a country or
region to implement effective adaptation measures.
Additionality
Reduction in emissions by sources or enhancement of removals by
sinks that is additional to any that would occur in the absence of
a Joint Implementation (JI) or a Clean Development Mechanism
(CDM) project activity as defined in the Kyoto Protocol Articles on
JI and CDM. This definition may be further broadened to include
financial, investment, technology, and environmental additionality.
Under financial additionality, the project activity funding is
additional to existing Global Environmental Facility, other financial
commitments of parties included in Annex I, Official Development
Assistance, and other systems of cooperation. Under investment
additionality, the value of the Emissions Reduction Unit/Certified
Emission Reduction Unit shall significantly improve the financial
or commercial viability of the project activity. Under technology
additionality, the technology used for the project activity shall
be the best available for the circumstances of the host party.
Environmental additionality refers to the environmental integrity
of the claimed amount by which greenhouse gas emissions are
reduced due to a project relative to its baseline. A project activity
is further additional, if the incentive from the sale of emission
allowances helps to overcome barriers to its implementation.
Aerosols
A collection of airborne solid or liquid particles, typically between
.01 and 10 μm in size and residing in the atmosphere for at least
several hours. Aerosols may be of either natural or anthropogenic
origin. Aerosols may influence climate in several ways: directly
through scattering and absorbing radiation, and indirectly through
acting as condensation nuclei for cloud formation or modifying the
optical properties and lifetime of clouds.
Afforestation
Direct human-induced conversion of land that has not been forested
for a period of at least 50 years to forested land through planting,
seeding and/or the human-induced promotion of natural seed
sources . See also Re- and Deforestation.
Agreement
In this Report, the degree of agreement is the relative level of
convergence of the literature as assessed by the authors.
Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS)
Formed at the Second World Climate Conference (1990). AOSIS
comprises small-island and low-lying coastal developing countries
that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse consequences of
climate change, such as sea-level rise, coral bleaching, and the
increased frequency and intensity of tropical storms. With more than
states from the Atlantic, Caribbean, Indian Ocean, Mediterranean,
and Pacific, AOSIS share common objectives on environmental and
sustainable development matters in the UNFCCC process.
Ancillary benefits
Policies aimed at some target, e.g. climate change mitigation, may
be paired with positive side effects, such as increased resource-use
efficiency, reduced emissions of air pollutants associated with fossil
fuel use, improved transportation, agriculture, land-use practices,
employment, and fuel security. Ancillary impacts is also used
when the effects may be negative. Policies directed at abating air
pollution may consider greenhouse-gas mitigation an ancillary
benefit, but this perspective is not considered in this assessment.
See also co-benefits.
Annex I countries
The group of countries included in Annex I (as amended in 1998)
to the UNFCCC, including all the OECD countries and economies
in transition. Under Articles 4.2 (a) and 4.2 (b) of the Convention,
Annex I countries committed themselves specifically to the aim of
returning individually or jointly to their 1990 levels of greenhousegas
emissions by the year 2000. By default, the other countries are
referred to as Non-Annex I countries.
For a discussion of the term forest and related terms such as afforestation,
reforestation, and deforestation (ARD), see the IPCC Special Report on Land
Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry, Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Editor: Aviel Verbruggen (Belgium)
Notes:  entries (highlighted in bold) are by preference subjects; a main entry can contain subentries, also in bold,
e.g. Final Energy is defined under the entry Energy. Some definitions are adapted from Cleveland C.J. and C. Morris, 2006:
Dictionary of Energy, Elsevier, Amsterdam. The  is followed by a list of Acronyms/Abbreviations and by a list of Chemical
Compounds (Annex II).


Annex II countries
The group of countries included in Annex II to the UNFCCC,
including all OECD countries. Under Article 4.2 (g) of the
Convention, these countries are expected to provide financial
resources to assist developing countries to comply with their
obligations, such as preparing national reports. Annex II countries
are also expected to promote the transfer of environmentally sound
technologies to developing countries.
Annex B countries
The countries included in Annex B to the Kyoto Protocol that have
agreed to a target for their greenhouse-gas emissions, including all
the Annex I countries (as amended in 1998) except for Turkey and
Belarus.
Anthropogenic emissions
Emissions of greenhouse gases, greenhouse-gas precursors, and
aerosols associated with human activities. These include the
burning of fossil fuels, deforestation, land-use changes, livestock,
fertilization, etc. that result in a net increase in emissions.
Assigned Amount (AA)
Under the Kyoto Protocol, the assigned amount is the quantity of
greenhouse-gas emissions that an Annex B country has agreed to
as its ceiling for its emissions in the first commitment period (2008
to 2012). The AA is the country’s total greenhouse-gas emissions
in 1990 multiplied by five (for the five-year commitment period)
and by the percentage it agreed to as listed in Annex B of the Kyoto
Protocol (e.g. 92% for the EU; 93% for the USA).
Assigned Amount Unit (AAU)
An AAU equals 1 tonne (metric ton) of CO2-equivalent emissions
calculated using the Global Warming Potential.
Backstop technology
Models estimating mitigation often characterize an arbitrary carbonfree
technology (often for power generation) that becomes available
in the future in unlimited supply over the horizon of the model. This
allows models to explore the consequences and importance of a
generic solution technology without becoming enmeshed in picking
the technology. This “backstop” technology might be a nuclear
technology, fossil technology with capture and sequestration,
solar, or something as yet unimagined. The backstop technology is
typically assumed either not to currently exist, or to exist only at
higher costs relative to conventional alternatives.
Banking
According to the Kyoto Protocol [Article 3 (13)], parties included
in Annex I to the UNFCCC may save excess AAUs from the first
commitment period for compliance with their respective cap in
subsequent commitment periods (post-2012).
Barrier
Any obstacle to reaching a goal, adaptation or mitigation potential
that can be overcome or attenuated by a policy, programme, or
measure. Barrier removal includes correcting market failures
directly or reducing the transactions costs in the public and private
sectors by e.g. improving institutional capacity, reducing risk
and uncertainty, facilitating market transactions, and enforcing
regulatory policies.
Baseline
The reference for measurable quantities from which an alternative
outcome can be measured, e.g. a non-intervention scenario is used
as a reference in the analysis of intervention scenarios.
Benchmark
A measurable variable used as a baseline or reference in evaluating
the performance of an organization. Benchmarks may he drawn
from internal experience, that of other organizations or from legal
requirement and are often used to gauge changes in performance
over time.
Benefit transfer
An application of monetary values from one particular analysis to
another policy-decision setting, often in a geographic area other
than the one in which the original study was performed.
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)
The amount of dissolved oxygen consumed by micro-organisms
(bacteria) in the bio-chemical oxidation of organic and inorganic
matter in waste water.
Biocovers
Layers placed on top of landfills that are biologically active in
oxidizing methane into CO2.
Biofilters
Filters using biological material to filter or chemically process
pollutants like oxidizing methane into CO2.
Biodiversity
The variability among living organisms from all sources including,
inter alia, terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the
ecological complexes of which they are part; this includes diversity
within species, between species and of ecosystems.
Bioenergy
Energy derived from biomass.
Biofuel
Any liquid, gaseous, or solid fuel produced from plant or animal
organic matter. E.g. soybean oil, alcohol from fermented sugar,
black liquor from the paper manufacturing process, wood as fuel,
etc. Second-generation biofuels are products such as ethanol and
biodiesel derived from ligno-cellulosic biomass by chemical or
biological processes.
Biological options
Biological options for mitigation of climate change involve one or
more of the three strategies: conservation - conserving an existing
carbon pool, thereby preventing CO2 emissions to the atmosphere;
sequestration - increasing the size of existing carbon pools, thereby
extracting CO2 from the atmosphere; substitution - substituting
biomass for fossil fuels or energy-intensive products, thereby
reducing CO2 emissions.
Biomass
The total mass of living organisms in a given area or of a given
species usually expressed as dry weight. Organic matter consisting
of, or recently derived from, living organisms (especially regarded
as fuel) excluding peat. Biomass includes products, by-products and
waste derived from such material. Cellulosic biomass is biomass
from cellulose, the primary structural component of plants and
trees
Black Carbon
Particle matter in the atmosphere that consists of soot, charcoal
and/or possible light-absorbing refractory organic material. Black
carbon is operationally defined matter based on measurement of
light absorption and chemical reactivity and/or thermal stability.
Bottom-up models
Models represent reality by aggregating characteristics of specific
activities and processes, considering technological, engineering and
cost details. See also top-down models.


Bubble
Policy instrument for pollution abatement named for its treatment of
multiple emission points as if they were contained in an imaginary
bubble. Article 4 of the Kyoto Protocol allows a group of countries
to meet their target listed in Annex B jointly by aggregating their
total emissions under one ‘bubble’ and sharing the burden (e.g. the
EU).
Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS)
A process consisting of separation of CO2 from industrial and
energy-related sources, transport to a storage location, and longterm
isolation from the atmosphere.
Carbon cycle
The set of processes such as photosynthesis, respiration,
decomposition, and air-sea exchange, by which carbon continuously
cycles through various reservoirs, such as the atmosphere, living
organisms, soils, and oceans.
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
CO2 is a naturally occurring gas, and a by-product of burning fossil
fuels or biomass, of land-use changes and of industrial processes.
It is the principal anthropogenic greenhouse gas that affects
Earth’s radiative balance. It is the reference gas against which
other greenhouse gases are measured and therefore it has a Global
Warming Potential of 1.
Carbon dioxide fertilization
The enhancement of the growth of plants because of increased
atmospheric CO2 concentration. Depending on their mechanism of
photosynthesis, certain types of plants are more sensitive to changes
in atmospheric CO2 concentration than others.
Carbon intensity
The amount of emissions of CO2 per unit of GDP.
Carbon leakage
The part of emissions reductions in Annex B countries that may
be offset by an increase of the emissions in the non-constrained
countries above their baseline levels. This can occur through (1)
relocation of energy-intensive production in non-constrained
regions; (2) increased consumption of fossil fuels in these regions
through decline in the international price of oil and gas triggered
by lower demand for these energies; and (3) changes in incomes
(thus in energy demand) because of better terms of trade. Leakage
also refers to GHG-related effects of GHG-emission reduction or
CO2-sequestration project activities that occur outside the project
boundaries and that are measurable and attributable to the activity.
On most occasions, leakage is understood as counteracting the
initial activity. Nevertheless, there may be situations where effects
attributable to the activity outside the project area lead to GHGemission
reductions. These are commonly called spill-over. While
(negative) leakage leads to a discount of emission reductions as
verified, positive spill-over may not in all cases be accounted for.
Carbon pool
Carbon pools are: above-ground biomass, belowground biomass,
litter, dead wood and soil organic carbon. CDM project participants
may choose not to account one or more carbon pools if they provide
transparent and verifiable information showing that the choice will
not increase the expected net anthropogenic GHG removals by
sinks.
Carbon price
What has to be paid (to some public authority as a tax rate, or on
some emission permit exchange) for the emission of 1 tonne of CO2
into the atmosphere. In the models and this Report, the carbon price
is the social cost of avoiding an additional unit of CO2 equivalent
emission. In some models it is represented by the shadow price of
an additional unit of CO2 emitted, in others by the rate of carbon tax,
or the price of emission-permit allowances. It has also been used
in this Report as a cut-off rate for marginal abatement costs in the
assessment of economic mitigation potentials.
Cap
Mandated restraint as an upper limit on emissions. The Kyoto
Protocol mandates emissions caps in a scheduled timeframe on the
anthropogenic GHG emissions released by Annex B countries. By
-2012 the EU e.g. must reduce its CO2-equivalent emissions of
six greenhouse gases to a level 8% lower than the 1990-level.
Capacity building
In the context of climate change, capacity building is developing
technical skills and institutional capabilities in developing countries
and economies in transition to enable their participation in all aspects
of adaptation to, mitigation of, and research on climate change, and
in the implementation of the Kyoto Mechanisms, etc.
CCS-ready
If rapid deployment of CCS is desired, new power plants could be
designed and located to be ‘CCS-ready’ by reserving space for the
capture installation, designing the unit for optimal performance
when capture is added and siting the plant to enable access to
storage reservoirs.
Certified Emission Reduction Unit (CER)
Equal to one metric tonne of CO2-equivalent emissions reduced
or sequestered through a Clean Development Mechanism project,
calculated using Global Warming Potentials. In order to reflect
potential non-permanence of afforestation and reforestation project
activities, the use of temporary certificates for Net Anthropogenic
Greenhouse Gas Removal was decided by COP 9. See also
Emissions Reduction Units.
Chemical oxygen demand (COD)
The quantity of oxygen required for the complete oxidation of
organic chemical compounds in water; used as a measure of the
level of organic pollutants in natural and waste waters.
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
Greenhouse gases covered under the 1987 Montreal Protocol and used
for refrigeration, air conditioning, packaging, insulation, solvents,
or aerosol propellants. Because they are not destroyed in the lower
atmosphere, CFCs drift into the upper atmosphere where, given
suitable conditions, they break down ozone. These gases are being
replaced by other compounds, including hydrochlorofluorocarbons
and hydrofluorocarbons, which are greenhouse gases covered under
the Kyoto Protocol.
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)
Defined in Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol, the CDM is intended
to meet two objectives: (1) to assist parties not included in Annex
I in achieving sustainable development and in contributing to
the ultimate objective of the convention; and (2) to assist parties
included in Annex I in achieving compliance with their quantified
emission limitation and reduction commitments. Certified Emission
Reduction Units from CDM projects undertaken in Non-Annex
I countries that limit or reduce GHG emissions, when certified
by operational entities designated by Conference of the Parties/
Meeting of the Parties, can be accrued to the investor (government
or industry) from parties in Annex B. A share of the proceeds from
certified project activities is used to cover administrative expenses
as well as to assist developing country parties that are particularly
vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change to meet the costs
of adaptation.


Climate Change (CC)
Climate change refers to a change in the state of the climate that can
be identified (e.g. using statistical tests) by changes in the mean and/
or the variability of its properties, and that persists for an extended
period, typically decades or longer. Climate change may be due
to natural internal processes or external forcings, or to persistent
anthropogenic changes in the composition of the atmosphere or in
land use.
Note that UNFCCC, in its Article 1, defines “climate change” as “a
change of climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human
activity that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and
which is in addition to natural climate variability observed over
comparable time periods”. The UNFCCC thus makes a distinction
between “climate change” attributable to human activities altering
the atmospheric composition, and “climate variability” attributable
to natural causes.
Climate feedback
An interaction mechanism between processes in the climate system
is a climate feedback when the result of an initial process triggers
changes in secondary processes that in turn influence the initial
one. A positive feedback intensifies the initial process; a negative
feedback reduces the initial process. Example of a positive climate
feedback: higher temperatures as initial process cause melting of
the arctic ice leading to less reflection of solar radiation, what leads
to higher temperatures. Example of a negative feedback: higher
temperatures increase the amount of cloud cover (thickness or
extent) that could reduce incoming solar radiation and so limit the
increase in temperature.
Climate sensitivity
In IPCC Reports, equilibrium climate sensitivity refers to the
equilibrium change in annual mean global surface temperature
following a doubling of the atmospheric CO2-equivalent
concentration. The evaluation of the equilibrium climate sensitivity
is expensive and often hampered by computational constraints.
The effective climate sensitivity is a related measure that
circumvents the computational problem by avoiding the requirement
of equilibrium. It is evaluated from model output for evolving
non-equilibrium conditions. It is a measure of the strengths of the
feedbacks at a particular time and may vary with forcing history
and climate state. The climate sensitivity parameter refers to the
equilibrium change in the annual mean global surface temperature
following a unit change in radiative forcing (K/W/m2)
The transient climate response is the change in the global surface
temperature, averaged over a 20-year period, centred at the time
of CO2 doubling, i.e., at year 70 in a 1% per year compound CO2
increase experiment with a global coupled climate model. It is a
measure of the strength and rapidity of the surface temperature
response to greenhouse gas forcing.
Climate threshold
The point at which the atmospheric concentration of greenhouse
gases triggers a significant climatic or environmental event, which
is considered unalterable, such as widespread bleaching of corals or
a collapse of oceanic circulation systems.
CO2-equivalent concentration
The concentration of carbon dioxide that would cause the same
amount of radiative forcing as a given mixture of carbon dioxide
and other greenhouse gases.
CO2-equivalent emission
The amount of CO2 emission that would cause the same radiative
forcing as an emitted amount of a well mixed greenhouse gas, or a
mixture of well mixed greenhouse gases, all multiplied with their
respective Global Warming Potentials to take into account the
differing times they remain in the atmosphere.
Co-benefits
The benefits of policies implemented for various reasons at the
same time, acknowledging that most policies designed to address
greenhouse gas mitigation have other, often at least equally
important, rationales (e.g., related to objectives of development,
sustainability, and equity). The term co-impact is also used in a
more generic sense to cover both positive and negative side of the
benefits. See also ancillary benefits.
Co-generation
The use of waste heat from thermal electricity-generation plants.
The heat is e.g. condensing heat from steam turbines or hot flue
gases exhausted from gas turbines, for industrial use, buildings or
district heating. Synonym for Combined Heat and Power (CHP)
generation.
Combined-cycle Gas Turbine (CCGT)
Power plant that combines two processes for generating electricity.
First, gas or light fuel oil feeds a gas turbine that inevitably exhausts
hot flue gases (>800°C). Second, heat recovered from these gases,
with additional firing, is the source for producing steam that drives a
steam turbine. The turbines rotate separate alternators.
It becomes an integrated CCGT when the fuel is syngas from a
coal or biomass gasification reactor with exchange of energy flows
between the gasification and CCGT plants.
Compliance
Compliance is whether and to what extent countries do adhere to
the provisions of an accord. Compliance depends on implementing
policies ordered, and on whether measures follow up the policies.
Compliance is the degree to which the actors whose behaviour is
targeted by the agreement, local government units, corporations,
organizations or individuals, conform to the implementing
obligations. See also implementation.
Conference of the Parties (COP)
The supreme body of the UNFCCC, comprising countries with right
to vote that have ratified or acceded to the convention. The first
session of the Conference of the Parties (COP-1) was held in Berlin
(1995), followed by 2.Geneva (1996), 3.Kyoto (1997), 4.Buenos
Aires (1998), 5.Bonn (1999), 6.The Hague/Bonn (2000, 2001),
.Marrakech (2001), 8.Delhi (2002), 9.Milan (2003), 10.Buenos
Aires (2004), 11.Montreal (2005), 12.Nairobi (2006). See also
Meeting of the Parties (MOP).
Contingent Valuation Method (CVM)
CVM is an approach to quantitatively assess values assigned by people
in monetary (willingness to pay) and non monetary (willingness to
contribute with time, resources etc.) terms. It is a direct method to
estimate economic values for ecosystem and environmental services.
A survey of people are asked their willingness to pay for access
to, or their willingness to accept compensation for removal of, a
specific environmental service, based on a hypothetical scenario and
description of the environmental service. See also values.
Cost
The consumption of resources such as labor time, capital, materials,
fuels and so on as the consequence of an action. In economics all
resources are valued at their opportunity cost, being the value of
the most valuable alternative use of the resources. Costs are defined
in a variety of ways and under a variety of assumptions that affect
their value
Cost types include: administrative costs of planning, management,
monitoring, audits, accounting, reporting, clerical activities,
etc. associated with a project or programme; damage costs to
ecosystems, economies and people due to negative effects from
climate change; implementation costs of changing existing rules
and regulation, capacity building efforts, information, training and
education, etc. to put a policy into place; private costs are carried


by individuals, companies or other private entities that undertake the
action, where social costs include additionally the external costs on
the environment and on society as a whole.
Costs can be expressed as total, average (unit, specific) being the
total divided by the number of units of the item for which the cost
is being assessed, and marginal or incremental costs as the cost of
the last additional unit.
The perspectives adopted in this report are: Project level considers a
“standalone” activity that is assumed not to have significant indirect
economic impacts on markets and prices (both demand and supply)
beyond the activity itself. The activity can be the implementation of
specific technical facilities, infrastructure, demand-side regulations,
information efforts, technical standards, etc. Technology level
considers a specific greenhouse-gas mitigation technology, usually
with several applications in different projects and sectors. The
literature on technologies covers their technical characteristics,
especially evidence on learning curves as the technology diffuses
and matures. Sector level considers sector policies in a “partialequilibrium”
context, for which other sectors and the macroeconomic
variables are assumed to be as given. The policies can include
economic instruments related to prices, taxes, trade, and financing,
specific large-scale investment projects, and demand-side regulation
efforts. Macroeconomic level considers the impacts of policies on
real income and output, employment and economic welfare across
all sectors and markets. The policies include all sorts of economic
policies, such as taxes, subsidies, monetary policies, specific
investment programmes, and technology and innovation policies.
The negative of costs are benefits, and often both are considered
together.
Cost-benefit analysis
Monetary measurement of all negative and positive impacts
associated with a given action. Costs and benefits are compared in
terms of their difference and/or ratio as an indicator of how a given
investment or other policy effort pays off seen from the society’s
point of view.
Cost-effectiveness analysis
A special case of cost-benefit analysis in which all the costs of a
portfolio of projects are assessed in relation to a fixed policy goal.
The policy goal in this case represents the benefits of the projects
and all the other impacts are measured as costs or as negative costs
(co-benefits). The policy goal can be, for example, a specified goal
of emissions reductions of greenhouse gases.
Crediting period
The CDM crediting period is the time during which a project
activity is able to generate GHG-emission reduction or CO2 removal
certificates. Under certain conditions, the crediting period can be
renewed up to two times.
Deforestation
The natural or anthropogenic process that converts forest land to
non-forest. See afforestation and reforestation.
Demand-side management (DSM)
Policies and programmes for influencing the demand for goods and/
or services. In the energy sector, DSM aims at reducing the demand
for electricity and energy sources. DSM helps to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions.
Dematerialization
The process by which economic activity is decoupled from
matter–energy throughput, through processes such as eco-efficient
production or industrial ecology, allowing environmental impact to
fall per unit of economic activity.
Deposit-refund system
A deposit or fee (tax) is paid when acquiring a commodity and a
refund or rebate is received for implementation of a specified action
(mostly delivering the commodity at a particular place).
Desertification
This refers to land degradation in arid, semi-arid, and dry subhumid
areas resulting from various factors, including climatic
variations and human activities. The United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification defines land degradation as a reduction or
loss, in arid, semi-arid, and dry sub-humid areas, of the biological
or economic productivity and complexity of rain-fed cropland,
irrigated cropland, or range, pasture, forest and woodlands
resulting from land uses or from a process or combination of
processes, including processes arising from human activities and
habitation patterns, such as soil erosion caused by wind and/or
water, deterioration of the physical, chemical and biological or
economic properties of soil and long-term loss of natural vegetation.
Devegetation
This is loss of vegetation density within one land-cover class.
Development path
An evolution based on an array of technological, economic, social,
institutional, cultural and biophysical characteristics that determine
the interactions between human and natural systems, including
production and consumption patterns in all countries, over time at a
particular scale. Alternative development paths refer to different
possible trajectories of development, the continuation of current
trends being just one of the many paths.
Discounting
A mathematical operation making monetary (or other) amounts
received or expended at different points in time (years) comparable
across time. The operator uses a fixed or possibly time-varying
discount rate (>0) from year to year that makes future value worth
less today. In a descriptive discounting approach one accepts the
discount rates people (savers and investors) actually apply in their
day-to-day decisions (private discount rate). In a prescriptive
(ethical or normative) discounting approach the discount rate is
fixed from a social perspective, e.g. based on an ethical judgement
about the interests of future generations (social discount rate).
District heating
Hot water (steam in old systems) is distributed from central stations
to buildings and industries in a densely occupied area (a district, a
city or an industrialized area such as the Ruhr or Saar in Germany).
The insulated two-pipe network functions like a water-based central
heating system in a building. The central heat sources can be wasteheat
recovery at industrial processes, waste-incineration plants,
cogeneration power plants or stand-alone boilers burning fossil
fuels or biomass.
Double dividend
The extent to which revenue-generating instruments, such as carbon
taxes or auctioned (tradable) carbon emission permits can (1) limit
or reduce GHG emissions and (2) offset at least part of the potential
welfare losses of climate policies through recycling the revenue in
the economy to reduce other taxes likely to cause distortions. In a
world with involuntary unemployment, the climate change policy
adopted may have an effect (a positive or negative ‘third dividend’)
on employment. Weak double dividend occurs as long as there is
a revenue-recycling effect. That is, revenues are recycled through
reductions in the marginal rates of distorting taxes. Strong double
dividend requires that the (beneficial) revenue-recycling effect more
than offsets the combination of the primary cost and in this case, the
net cost of abatement is negative. See also interaction effect.
Economies in Transition (EITs)
Countries with their economies changing from a planned economic
system to a market economy.


Economies of scale (scale economies)
The unit cost of an activity declines when the activity is extended
(e.g., more units are produced).
Ecosystem
A system of living organisms interacting with each other and their
physical environment. The boundaries of what could be called
an ecosystem are somewhat arbitrary, depending on the focus of
interest or study. Thus, the extent of an ecosystem may range from
very small spatial scales to the entire planet Earth ultimately.
Emissions Direct / Indirect
Direct emissions or “point of emission” are defined at the point
in the energy chain where they are released and are attributed to
that point in the energy chain, whether a sector, a technology or an
activity. E.g. emissions from coal-fired power plants are considered
direct emissions from the energy supply sector. Indirect emissions
or emissions “allocated to the end-use sector” refer to the energy
use in end-use sectors and account for the emissions associated
with the upstream production of the end-use energy. E.g. some
emissions associated with electricity generation can be attributed
to the buildings sector corresponding to the building sector’s use
of electricity.
Emission factor
An emission factor is the rate of emission per unit of activity, output
or input. E.g. a particular fossil fuel power plant has a CO2 emission
factor of 0.765 kg/kWh generated.
Emission permit
An emission permit is a non-transferable or tradable entitlement
allocated by a government to a legal entity (company or other
emitter) to emit a specified amount of a substance. A tradable
permit is an economic policy instrument under which rights to
discharge pollution - in this case an amount of greenhouse gas
emissions - can be exchanged through either a free or a controlled
permit-market.
Emission quota
The portion of total allowable emissions assigned to a country
or group of countries within a framework of maximum total
emissions.
Emissions Reduction Unit (ERU)
Equal to one metric tonne of CO2-equivalent emissions reduced or
sequestered arising from a Joint Implementation (defined in Article
of the Kyoto Protocol) project. See also Certified Emission
Reduction Unit and emissions trading.
Emission standard
A level of emission that by law or by voluntary agreement may not be
exceeded. Many standards use emission factors in their prescription
and therefore do not impose absolute limits on the emissions.
Emissions trading
A market-based approach to achieving environmental objectives.
It allows those reducing GHG emissions below their emission cap
to use or trade the excess reductions to offset emissions at another
source inside or outside the country. In general, trading can occur at
the intra-company, domestic, and international levels. The Second
Assessment Report by the IPCC adopted the convention of using
permits for domestic trading systems and quotas for international
trading systems. Emissions trading under Article 17 of the Kyoto
Protocol is a tradable quota system based on the assigned amounts
calculated from the emission reduction and limitation commitments
listed in Annex B of the Protocol.
Emission trajectories
These are projections of future emission pathways, or observed
emission patterns.
Energy
The amount of work or heat delivered. Energy is classified in a
variety of types and becomes useful to human ends when it flows
from one place to another or is converted from one type into another.
Primary energy (also referred to as energy sources) is the energy
embodied in natural resources (e.g., coal, crude oil, natural gas,
uranium) that has not undergone any anthropogenic conversion. It
is transformed into secondary energy by cleaning (natural gas),
refining (oil in oil products) or by conversion into electricity or heat.
When the secondary energy is delivered at the end-use facilities it
is called final energy (e.g., electricity at the wall outlet), where it
becomes usable energy (e.g., light). Daily, the sun supplies large
quantities of energy as rainfall, winds, radiation, etc. Some share
is stored in biomass or rivers that can be harvested by men. Some
share is directly usable such as daylight, ventilation or ambient heat.
Renewable energy is obtained from the continuing or repetitive
currents of energy occurring in the natural environment and includes
non-carbon technologies such as solar energy, hydropower, wind,
tide and waves and geothermal heat, as well as carbon-neutral
technologies such as biomass. Embodied energy is the energy used
to produce a material substance (such as processed metals or building
materials), taking into account energy used at the manufacturing
facility (zero order), energy used in producing the materials that are
used in the manufacturing facility (first order), and so on.
Energy efficiency
The ratio of useful energy output of a system, conversion process or
activity to its energy input.
Energy intensity
The ratio of energy use to economic output. At the national level,
energy intensity is the ratio of total domestic primary energy use
or final energy use to Gross Domestic Product. See also specific
energy use
Energy security
The various security measures that a given nation, or the global
community as a whole, must carry out to maintain an adequate
energy supply.
Energy Service Company (ESCO)
A company that offers energy services to end-users, guarantees the
energy savings to be achieved tying them directly to its remuneration,
as well as finances or assists in acquiring financing for the operation
of the energy system, and retains an on-going role in monitoring the
savings over the financing term.
Environmental effectiveness
The extent to which a measure, policy or instrument produces a
decided, decisive or desired environmental effect.
Environmentally sustainable technologies
Technologies that are less polluting, use resources in a more
sustainable manner, recycle more of their wastes and products,
and handle residual wastes in a more acceptable manner than the
technologies that they substitute. They are also more compatible with
nationally determined socio-economic, cultural and environmental
priorities.
Evidence
Information or signs indicating whether a belief or proposition is true
or valid. In this Report, the degree of evidence reflects the amount
of scientific/technical information on which the Lead Authors are
basing their findings.


Externality / External cost / External benefit
Externalities arise from a human activity, when agents responsible
for the activity do not take full account of the activity’s impact on
others’ production and consumption possibilities, while there exists
no compensation for such impact. When the impact is negative, so
are external costs. When positive they are referred to as external
benefits.
Feed-in tariff
The price per unit of electricity that a utility or power supplier has
to pay for distributed or renewable electricity fed into the grid by
non-utility generators. A public authority regulates the tariff.
Flaring
Open air burning of waste gases and volatile liquids, through a
chimney, at oil wells or rigs, in refineries or chemical plants and at
landfills.
Forecast
Projected outcome from established physical, technological,
economic, social, behavioral, etc. patterns.
Forest
Defined under the Kyoto Protocol as a minimum area of land of
.05-1.0 ha with tree-crown cover (or equivalent stocking level)
of more than 10-30 % with trees with the potential to reach a
minimum height of 2-5 m at maturity in situ. A forest may consist
either of closed forest formations where trees of various storey and
undergrowth cover a high proportion of the ground or of open forest.
Young natural stands and all plantations that have yet to reach a
crown density of 10-30 % or tree height of 2-5 m are included under
forest, as are areas normally forming part of the forest area that are
temporarily un-stocked as a result of human intervention such as
harvesting or natural causes but which are expected to revert to
forest. See also Afforestation, Deforestation and Reforestation.
Fossil fuels
Carbon-based fuels from fossil hydrocarbon deposits, including
coal, peat, oil and natural gas.
Free Rider
One who benefits from a common good without contributing to its
creation or preservation.
Fuel cell
A fuel cell generates electricity in a direct and continuous way from
the controlled electrochemical reaction of hydrogen or another fuel
and oxygen. With hydrogen as fuel it emits only water and heat (no
CO2) and the heat can be utilized (see cogeneration).
Fuel switching
In general, this is substituting fuel A for fuel B. In the climatechange
discussion it is implicit that fuel A has lower carbon content
than fuel B, e.g., natural gas for coal.
Full-cost pricing
Setting the final prices of goods and services to include both the
private costs of inputs and the external costs created by their
production and use.
G77/China. See Group of 77 and China.
General circulation (climate) model (GCM)
A numerical representation of the climate system based on the
physical, chemical and biological properties of its components, their
interactions and feedback processes, and accounting for all or some
of its known properties. The climate system can be represented
by models of varying complexity, i.e. for any one component or
combination of components a hierarchy of models can be identified,
differing in such aspects as the number of spatial dimensions, the
extent to which physical, chemical or biological processes are
explicitly represented, or the level at which the parameters are
assessed empirically. Coupled atmosphere/ocean/sea-ice General
Circulation Models provide a comprehensive representation of the
climate system. There is an evolution towards more complex models
with active chemistry and biology.
General equilibrium analysis
General equilibrium analysis considers simultaneously all the
markets and feedback effects among these markets in an economy
leading to market clearance. See also market equilibrium.
Geo-engineering
Technological efforts to stabilize the climate system by direct
intervention in the energy balance of the Earth for reducing global
warming
Global Environmental Facility (GEF)
The Global Environment Facility (GEF), established in 1991, helps
developing countries fund projects and programmes that protect
the global environment. GEF grants support projects related to
biodiversity, climate change, international waters, land degradation,
the ozone layer, and persistent organic pollutants
Global warming
Global warming refers to the gradual increase, observed or
projected, in global surface temperature, as one of the consequences
of radiative forcing caused by anthropogenic emissions.
Global Warming Potential (GWP)
An index, based upon radiative properties of well mixed greenhouse
gases, measuring the radiative forcing of a unit mass of a given
well mixed greenhouse gas in today’s atmosphere integrated over
a chosen time horizon, relative to that of CO2. The GWP represents
the combined effect of the differing lengths of time that these
gases remain in the atmosphere and their relative effectiveness in
absorbing outgoing infrared radiation. The Kyoto Protocol is based
on GWPs from pulse emissions over a 100-year time frame.
Green accounting
Attempts to integrate into macroeconomic studies a broader set of
social welfare measures, covering e.g., social, environmental, and
development oriented policy aspects. Green accounting includes
both monetary valuations that attempt to calculate a ‘green national
product’ with the economic damage by pollutants subtracted from the
national product, and accounting systems that include quantitative
non-monetary pollution, depletion and other data.
Greenhouse effect
Greenhouse gases effectively absorb infrared radiation, emitted
by the Earth’s surface, by the atmosphere itself due to the same
gases and by clouds. Atmospheric radiation is emitted to all sides,
including downward to the Earth’s surface. Thus, greenhouse gases
trap heat within the surface-troposphere system. This is called the
greenhouse effect.
Thermal infrared radiation in the troposphere is strongly coupled
to the temperature at the altitude at which it is emitted. In the
troposphere, the temperature generally decreases with height.
Effectively, infrared radiation emitted to space originates from an
altitude with a temperature of, on average, –19°C, in balance with
the net incoming solar radiation, whereas the Earth’s surface is kept
at a much higher temperature of, on average, +14°C.
An increase in the concentration of greenhouse gases leads to an
increased infrared opacity of the atmosphere and therefore to an
effective radiation into space from a higher altitude at a lower
temperature. This causes a radiative forcing that leads to an
enhancement of the greenhouse effect, the so-called enhanced
greenhouse effect.


Greenhouse gases (GHGs)
Greenhouse gases are those gaseous constituents of the atmosphere,
both natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation at
specific wavelengths within the spectrum of infrared radiation
emitted by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere and clouds. This
property causes the greenhouse effect. Water vapour (H2O), carbon
dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4) and ozone
(O3) are the primary greenhouse gases in the earth’s atmosphere.
Moreover, there are a number of entirely human-made greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere, such as the halocarbons and other chlorineand
bromine-containing substances, dealt with under the Montreal
Protocol. Besides carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and methane, the
Kyoto Protocol deals with the greenhouse gases sulphur hexafluoride,
hydrofluorocarbons, and perfluorocarbons.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
The sum of gross value added, at purchasers’ prices, by all resident
and non-resident producers in the economy, plus any taxes and
minus any subsidies not included in the value of the products in
a country or a geographic region for a given period, normally one
year. It is calculated without deducting for depreciation of fabricated
assets or depletion and degradation of natural resources.
Gross National Product (GNP)
GNP is a measure of national income. It measures value added from
domestic and foreign sources claimed by residents. GNP comprises
Gross Domestic Product plus net receipts of primary income from
non-resident income.
Gross World Product
An aggregation of the individual country’s Gross Domestic Products
to obtain the sum for the world.
Group of 77 and China (G77/China)
Originally 77, now more than 130, developing countries that act
as a major negotiating bloc in the UNFCCC process. G77/China
is also referred to as Non-Annex I countries in the context of the
UNFCCC.
Governance
The way government is understood has changed in response to
social, economic and technological changes over recent decades.
There is a corresponding shift from government defined strictly
by the nation-state to a more inclusive concept of governance,
recognizing the contributions of various levels of government
(global, international, regional, local) and the roles of the private
sector, of non-governmental actors and of civil society.
Hot air
Under the terms of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, national emission
targets in Annex B are expressed relative to emissions in the year
. For countries in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe
this target has proven to be higher than their current and projected
emissions for reasons unrelated to climate-change mitigation
activities. Russia and Ukraine, in particular, are expected to have
a substantial volume of excess emission allowances over the period
-2012 relative to their forecast emissions. These allowances
are sometimes referred to as hot air because, while they can be
traded under the Kyoto Protocol’s flexibility mechanisms, they did
not result from mitigation activities.
Hybrid vehicle
Any vehicle that employs two sources of propulsion, especially a
vehicle that combines an internal combustion engine with an electric
motor.
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)
One of the six gases or groups of gases to be curbed under the
Kyoto Protocol. They are produced commercially as a substitute
for chlorofluorocarbons. HFCs are largely used in refrigeration and
semiconductor manufacturing. Their Global Warming Potentials
range from 1,300 to 11,700.
Implementation
Implementation describes the actions taken to meet commitments
under a treaty and encompasses legal and effective phases. Legal
implementation refers to legislation, regulations, judicial decrees,
including other actions such as efforts to administer progress, which
governments take to translate international accords into domestic
law and policy. Effective implementation needs policies and
programmes that induce changes in the behaviour and decisions
of target groups. Target groups then take effective measures of
mitigation and adaptation.
Income elasticity (of demand)
This is the ratio of the percentage change in quantity of demand for
a good or service to a one percentage change in income. For most
goods and services, demand goes up when income grows, making
income elasticity positive. When the elasticity is less than one,
goods and services are called necessities.
Industrial ecology
The relationship of a particular industry with its environment. It
often refers to the conscious planning of industrial processes to
minimize their negative externalities (e.g., by heat and materials
cascading).
Inertia
In the context of climate-change mitigation, inertia relates to the
difficulty of change resulting from pre-existing conditions within
society such as physical man-made capital, natural capital and social
non-physical capital, including institutions, regulations and norms.
Existing structures lock in societies, making change more difficult.
Integrated assessment
A method of analysis that combines results and models from
the physical, biological, economic and social sciences, and the
interactions between these components in a consistent framework to
evaluate the status and the consequences of environmental change
and the policy responses to it.
Integrated Design Process (IDP) of buildings
Optimizing the orientation and shape of buildings and providing
high-performance envelopes for minimizing heating and cooling
loads. Passive techniques for heat transfer control, ventilation and
daylight access reduce energy loads further. Properly sized and
controlled, efficient mechanical systems address the left-over loads.
IDP requires an iterative design process involving all the major
stakeholders from building users to equipment suppliers, and can
achieve 30-75% savings in energy use in new buildings at little or
no additional investment cost.
Intelligent controls
In this report, the notion of ‘intelligent control’ refers to the
application of information technology in buildings to control
heating, ventilation, air-conditioning, and electricity use effectively.
It requires effective monitoring of parameters such as temperature,
convection, moisture, etc., with appropriate control measurements
(‘smart metering’).
Interaction effect
The consequence of the interaction of climate-change policy
instruments with existing domestic tax systems, including both
cost-increasing tax interaction and cost-reducing revenue-recycling
effect. The former reflects the impact that greenhouse gas policies
can have on labour and capital markets through their effects on real
wages and the real return to capital. Restricting allowable GHG


emissions, raises the carbon price and so the costs of production
and the prices of output, thus reducing the real return to labour and
capital. With policies that raise revenue for the government, carbon
taxes and auctioned permits, the revenues can be recycled to reduce
existing distortional taxes. See also double dividend.
Intergovernmental Organization (IGO)
Organizations constituted of governments. Examples include the
World Bank, the Organization of Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),
and other UN and regional organizations. The Climate Convention
allows accreditation of these IGOs to attend negotiating sessions.
International Energy Agency (IEA)
Established in 1974, the agency is linked with the OECD. It enables
OECD member countries to take joint measures to meet oil supply
emergencies, to share energy information, to coordinate their
energy policies, and to cooperate in developing rational energy use
programmes.
Joint Implementation (JI)
A market-based implementation mechanism defined in Article 6 of
the Kyoto Protocol, allowing Annex I countries or companies from
these countries to implement projects jointly that limit or reduce
emissions or enhance sinks, and to share the Emissions Reduction
Units. JI activity is also permitted in Article 4.2(a) of the UNFCCC.
See also Activities Implemented Jointly and Kyoto Mechanisms.
Kyoto Mechanisms (also called Flexibility Mechanisms)
Economic mechanisms based on market principles that parties to the
Kyoto Protocol can use in an attempt to lessen the potential economic
impacts of greenhouse gas emission-reduction requirements. They
include Joint Implementation (Article 6), Clean Development
Mechanism (Article 12), and Emissions trading (Article 17).
Kyoto Protocol
The Kyoto Protocol to the UNFCCC was adopted at the Third
Session of the Conference of the Parties (COP) in 1997 in Kyoto. It
contains legally binding commitments, in addition to those included
in the FCCC. Annex B countries agreed to reduce their anthropogenic
GHG emissions (carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide,
hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and sulphur hexafluoride) by
at least 5% below 1990 levels in the commitment period 2008-2012.
The Kyoto Protocol came into force on 16 February 2005.
Landfill
A landfill is a solid waste disposal site where waste is deposited
below, at or above ground level. Limited to engineered sites with
cover materials, controlled placement of waste and management of
liquids and gases. It excludes uncontrolled waste disposal.
Land-use
The total of arrangements, activities and inputs undertaken in a
certain land-cover type (a set of human actions). The social and
economic purposes for which land is managed (e.g., grazing, timber
extraction, and conservation). Land-use change occurs when, e.g.,
forest is converted to agricultural land or to urban areas.
Leapfrogging
The ability of developing countries to bypass intermediate
technologies and jump straight to advanced clean technologies.
Leapfrogging can enable developing countries to move to a lowemissions
development trajectory.
Learning by doing
As researchers and firms gain familiarity with a new technological
process, or acquire experience through expanded production they
can discover ways to improve processes and reduce cost. Learning
by doing is a type of experience-based technological change.
Levelized cost price
The unique price of the outputs of a project that makes the present
value of the revenues (benefits) equal to the present value of the
costs over the lifetime of the project. See also discounting and
present value.
Likelihood
The likelihood of an occurrence, outcome or result, where this can
be estimated probabilistically, is expressed in IPCC reports using a
standard terminology:
Particular, or a range
of, occurrences/outcomes
of an uncertain
event owning a
probability of
are said
>99% to be: Virtually certain
>90% Very likely
>66% Likely
to 66% About as likely as not
<33% Unlikely
<10% Very unlikely
<1% Exceptionally unlikely
Lock-in effect
Technologies that cover large market shares continue to be used
due to factors such as sunk investment costs, related infrastructure
development, use of complementary technologies and associated
social and institutional habits and structures.
Low-carbon technology
A technology that over its life cycle causes less CO2-eq. emissions
than other technological options do. See also Environmentally
sustainable technologies.
Macroeconomic costs
These costs are usually measured as changes in Gross Domestic
Product or changes in the growth of Gross Domestic Product, or as
loss of welfare or consumption.
Marginal cost pricing
The pricing of goods and services such that the price equals the
additional cost arising when production is expanded by one unit.
Economic theory shows that this way of pricing maximizes social
welfare in a first-best economy.
Market barriers
In the context of climate change mitigation, market barriers are
conditions that prevent or impede the diffusion of cost-effective
technologies or practices that would mitigate GHG emissions.
Market-based regulation
Regulatory approaches using price mechanisms (e.g., taxes and
auctioned tradable permits), among other instruments, to reduce
GHG emissions.
Market distortions and imperfections
In practice, markets will always exhibit distortions and imperfections
such as lack of information, distorted price signals, lack of
competition, and/or institutional failures related to regulation,
inadequate delineation of property rights, distortion-inducing fiscal
systems, and limited financial markets
Market equilibrium
The point at which the demand for goods and services equals the
supply; often described in terms of price levels, determined in a
competitive market, ‘clearing’ the market.
Market Exchange Rate (MER)
This is the rate at which foreign currencies are exchanged. Most
economies post such rates daily and they vary little across all the
exchanges. For some developing economies official rates and blackmarket
rates may differ significantly and the MER is difficult to pin
down.


Material efficiency options
In this report, options to reduce GHG emissions by decreasing the
volume of materials needed for a certain product or service
Measures
Measures are technologies, processes, and practices that reduce
GHG emissions or effects below anticipated future levels. Examples
of measures are renewable energy technologies, waste minimization
processes and public transport commuting practices, etc. See also
policies.
Methane (CH4)
Methane is one of the six greenhouse gases to be mitigated under
the Kyoto Protocol. It is the major component of natural gas and
associated with all hydrocarbon fuels, animal husbandry and
agriculture. Coal-bed methane is the gas found in coal seams.
Methane recovery
Methane emissions, e.g., from oil or gas wells, coal beds, peat bogs,
gas transmission pipelines, landfills, or anaerobic digesters, are
captured and used as a fuel or for some other economic purpose
(e.g., chemical feedstock).
Meeting of the Parties (to the Kyoto Protocol) (MOP)
The Conference of the Parties (COP) of the UNFCCC serves as
the Meeting of the Parties (MOP), the supreme body of the Kyoto
Protocol, since the latter entered into force on 16 February 2005.
Only parties to the Kyoto Protocol may participate in deliberations
and make decisions.
Millennium Development Goals (MDG)
A set of time-bound and measurable goals for combating poverty,
hunger, disease, illiteracy, discrimination against women and
environmental degradation, agreed at the UN Millennium Summit
in 2000.
Mitigation
Technological change and substitution that reduce resource inputs
and emissions per unit of output. Although several social, economic
and technological policies would produce an emission reduction,
with respect to climate change, mitigation means implementing
policies to reduce GHG emissions and enhance sinks.
Mitigative capacity
This is a country’s ability to reduce anthropogenic GHG emissions or
to enhance natural sinks, where ability refers to skills, competencies,
fitness and proficiencies that a country has attained and depends
on technology, institutions, wealth, equity, infrastructure and
information. Mitigative capacity is rooted in a country’s sustainable
development path.
Montreal Protocol
The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer
was adopted in Montreal in 1987, and subsequently adjusted and
amended in London (1990), Copenhagen (1992), Vienna (1995),
Montreal (1997) and Beijing (1999). It controls the consumption
and production of chlorine- and bromine-containing chemicals that
destroy stratospheric ozone, such as chlorofluorocarbons, methyl
chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, and many others.
Multi-attribute analysis.
Integrates different decision parameters and values in a quantitative
analysis without assigning monetary values to all parameters.
Multi-attribute analysis can combine quantitative and qualitative
information.
Multi-gas
Next to CO2 also the other greenhouse gases (methane, nitrous
oxide and fluorinated gases) are taken into account in e.g. achieving
reduction of emissions (multi-gas reduction) or stabilization of
concentrations (multi-gas stabilization).
National Action Plans
Plans submitted to the COP by parties outlining the steps that
they have adopted to limit their anthropogenic GHG emissions.
Countries must submit these plans as a condition of participating in
the UNFCCC and, subsequently, must communicate their progress
to the COP regularly. The National Action Plans form part of the
National Communications, which include the national inventory of
GHG sources and sinks.
Net anthropogenic greenhouse gas removals by sinks
For CDM afforestation and reforestation projects, ‘net anthropogenic
GHG removals by sinks’ equals the actual net GHG removals
by sinks minus the baseline net GHG removals by sinks minus
leakage.
Nitrous oxide (N2O)
One of the six types of greenhouse gases to be curbed under the
Kyoto Protocol.
Non-Annex I Countries/Parties
The countries that have ratified or acceded to the UNFCCC but are
not included in Annex I.
Non-Annex B Countries/Parties
The countries not included in Annex B of the Kyoto Protocol.
No-regret policy (options / potential)
Such policy would generate net social benefits whether or not
there is climate change associated with anthropogenic emissions of
greenhouse gases. No-regret options for GHG emissions reduction
refer to options whose benefits (such as reduced energy costs and
reduced emissions of local/regional pollutants) equal or exceed their
costs to society, excluding the benefits of avoided climate change.
Normative analysis
Economic analysis in which judgments about the desirability of
various policies are made. The conclusions rest on value judgments
as well as on facts and theories.
Oil sands and oil shale
Unconsolidated porous sands, sandstone rock and shales containing
bituminous material that can be mined and converted to a liquid
fuel.
Opportunities
Circumstances to decrease the gap between the market potential of
any technology or practice and the economic potential or technical
potential.
Ozone (O3)
Ozone, the tri-atomic form of oxygen, is a gaseous atmospheric
constituent. In the troposphere, ozone is created both naturally
and by photochemical reactions involving gases resulting from
human activities. Troposphere ozone acts as a greenhouse gas. In
the stratosphere, ozone is created by the interaction between solar
ultraviolet radiation and molecular oxygen (O2). Stratospheric
ozone plays a dominant role in the stratospheric radiative balance.
Its concentration is highest in the ozone layer.
Pareto criterion
A criterion testing whether an individual’s welfare can be
increased without making others in the society worse off. A Pareto
improvement occurs when an individual’s welfare is improved
without making the welfare of the rest of society worse off. A


Pareto optimum is reached when no one’s welfare can be increased
without making the welfare of the rest of society worse off, given
a particular distribution of income. Different income distributions
lead to different Pareto optima.
Passive solar design
Structural design and construction techniques that enable a building
to utilize solar energy for heating, cooling, and lighting by nonmechanical
means.
Perfluorocarbons (PFCs)
Among the six greenhouse gases to be abated under the Kyoto
Protocol. These are by-products of aluminium smelting and
uranium enrichment. They also replace chlorofluorocarbons in
manufacturing semiconductors. The Global Warming Potential of
PFCs is 6500–9200.
Policies
In UNFCCC parlance, policies are taken and/or mandated by a
government - often in conjunction with business and industry within
its own country, or with other countries - to accelerate mitigation
and adaptation measures. Examples of policies are carbon or
other energy taxes, fuel efficiency standards for automobiles, etc.
Common and co-ordinated or harmonised policies refer to those
adopted jointly by parties. See also measures.
Portfolio analysis
Deals with a portfolio of assets or policies that are characterized
by different risks and pay-offs. The objective function is built up
around the variability of returns and their risks, leading up to the
decision rule to choose the portfolio with highest expected return.
Post-consumer waste
Waste from consumption activities, e.g. packaging materials, paper,
glass, rests from fruits and vegetables, etc.
Potential
In the context of climate change, potential is the amount of
mitigation or adaptation that could be - but is not yet – realized over
time. As potential levels are identified: market, economic, technical
and physical.
• Market potential indicates the amount of GHG mitigation that
might be expected to occur under forecast market conditions
including policies and measures in place at the time.. It is based
on private unit costs and discount rates, as they appear in the
base year and as they are expected to change in the absence of
any additional policies and measures.
• Economic potential is in most studies used as the amount of
GHG mitigation that is cost-effective for a given carbon price,
based on social cost pricing and discount rates, including
energy savings, but without most externalities. Theoretically,
it is defined as the potential for cost-effective GHG mitigation
when non-market social costs and benefits are included with
market costs and benefits in assessing the options for particular
levels of carbon prices (as affected by mitigation policies) and
when using social discount rates instead of private ones. This
includes externalities, i.e., non-market costs and benefits such
as environmental co-benefits
• Technical potential is the amount by which it is possible
to reduce GHG emissions or improve energy efficiency by
implementing a technology or practice that has already been
demonstrated. No explicit reference to costs is made but
adopting ‘practical constraints’ may take into account implicit
economic considerations.
• Physical potential is the theoretical (thermodynamic)
and sometimes, in practice, rather uncertain upper limit to
mitigation.
Precautionary Principle
A provision under Article 3 of the UNFCCC, stipulating that the
parties should take precautionary measures to anticipate, prevent
or minimize the causes of climate change and mitigate its adverse
effects. Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage,
lack of full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason to
postpone such measures, taking into account that policies and
measures to deal with climate change should be cost-effective in
order to ensure global benefits at the lowest possible cost.
Precursors
Atmospheric compounds which themselves are not greenhouse
gases or aerosols, but which have an effect on greenhouse gas
or aerosol concentrations by taking part in physical or chemical
processes regulating their production or destruction rates.
Pre-industrial
The era before the industrial revolution of the late 18th and 19th
centuries, after which the use of fossil fuel for mechanization started
to increase.
Present value
The value of a money amount differs when the amount is available
at different moments in time (years). To make amounts at differing
times comparable and additive, a date is fixed as the ‘present’.
Amounts available at different dates in the future are discounted
back to a present value, and summed to get the present value of
a series of future cash flows. Net present value is the difference
between the present value of the revenues (benefits) with the present
value of the costs. See also discounting.
Price elasticity of demand
The ratio of the percentage change in the quantity of demand for a
good or service to one percentage change in the price of that good or
service. When the absolute value of the elasticity is between 0 and
, demand is called inelastic; when it is greater than one, demand is
called elastic.
‘Primary market’ and ‘secondary market’ trading
In commodities and financial exchanges, buyers and sellers who
trade directly with each other constitute the ‘primary market’,
while buying and selling through exchange facilities represent the
‘secondary market’.
Production frontier
The maximum outputs attainable with the optimal uses of available
inputs (natural resources, labour, capital, information).
Public sector leadership programmes in energy efficiency
Government purchasing and procurement of energy-efficient
products and services. Government agencies are responsible for
a wide range of energy-consuming facilities and services such as
government office buildings, schools, and health care facilities.
The government is often a country’s largest consumer of energy
and largest buyer of energy-using equipment. Indirect beneficial
impacts occur when governments act effectively as market leaders.
First, government buying power can create or expand demand for
energy-efficient products and services. Second, visible government
energy-saving actions can serve as an example for others.
Purchasing Power Parity (PPP)
The purchasing power of a currency is expressed using a basket of
goods and services that can be bought with a given amount in the
home country. International comparison of, e.g., Gross Domestic
Products of countries can be based on the purchasing power of
currencies rather than on current exchange rates. PPP estimates tend
to lower per capita GDPs in industrialized countries and raise per
capita GDPs in developing countries. (PPP is also an acronym for
polluter-pays-principle).


Radiative forcing
Radiative forcing is the change in the net vertical irradiance
(expressed in Watts per square metre: W/m2) at the tropopause
due to an internal change or a change in the external forcing of the
climate system, such as, for example, a change in the concentration
of CO2 or in the output of the sun.
Rebound effect
After implementation of efficient technologies and practices, part of
the savings is taken back for more intensive or other consumption,
e.g., improvements in car-engine efficiency lower the cost per
kilometre driven, encouraging more car trips or the purchase of a
more powerful vehicle.
Reforestation
Direct human-induced conversion of non-forested land to forested
land through planting, seeding and/or the human-induced promotion
of natural seed sources, on land that was previously forested but
converted to non-forested land. For the first commitment period
of the Kyoto Protocol, reforestation activities will be limited to
reforestation occurring on those lands that did not contain forest on
December 1989. See also afforestation and deforestation.
Reservoir
A component of the climate system, other than the atmosphere,
which has the capacity to store, accumulate or release a substance
of concern, e.g., carbon, a greenhouse gas or a precursor. Oceans,
soils, and forests are examples of reservoirs of carbon. Stock is the
absolute quantity of substance of concerns, held within a reservoir
at a specified time. See also Carbon pool.
Safe landing approach. See tolerable windows approach.
Scenario
A plausible description of how the future may develop based on
a coherent and internally consistent set of assumptions about
key driving forces (e.g., rate of technological change, prices)
and relationships. Note that scenarios are neither predictions nor
forecasts, but are useful to provide a view of the implications of
developments and actions.
Sequestration
Carbon storage in terrestrial or marine reservoirs. Biological
sequestration includes direct removal of CO2 from the atmosphere
through land-use change, afforestation, reforestation, carbon storage
in landfills and practices that enhance soil carbon in agriculture.
Shadow pricing
Setting prices of goods and services that are not, or incompletely,
priced by market forces or by administrative regulation, at the height
of their social marginal value. This technique is used in cost-benefit
analysis.
Sinks
Any process, activity or mechanism that removes a greenhouse gas
or aerosol, or a precursor of a greenhouse gas or aerosol from the
atmosphere.
Smart metering. See Intelligent control.
Social cost of carbon (SCC)
The discounted monetized sum (e.g. expressed as a price of
carbon in $/tCO2) of the annual net losses from impacts triggered
by an additional ton of carbon emitted today. According to usage
in economic theory, the social cost of carbon establishes an
economically optimal price of carbon at which the associated
marginal costs of mitigation would equal the marginal benefits of
mitigation.
Social unit costs of mitigation
Carbon prices in US$/tCO2 and US$/tC-eq (as affected by
mitigation policies and using social discount rates) required to
achieve a particular level of mitigation (economic potential) in
the form of a reduction below a baseline for GHG emissions. The
reduction is usually associated with a policy target, such as a cap
in an emissions trading scheme or a given level of stabilization of
GHG concentrations in the atmosphere.
Source
Source mostly refers to any process, activity or mechanism that
releases a greenhouse gas, aerosol or a precursor of a greenhouse
gas or aerosol into the atmosphere. Source can also refer to, e.g., an
energy source.
Specific energy use
The energy used in the production of a unit material, product or
service.
Spill-over effect
The effects of domestic or sector mitigation measures on other
countries or sectors. Spill-over effects can be positive or negative and
include effects on trade, carbon leakage, transfer of innovations, and
diffusion of environmentally sound technology and other issues.
Stabilization
Keeping constant the atmospheric concentrations of one or more
GHG (e.g., CO2) or of a CO2-equivalent basket of GHG. Stabilization
analyses or scenarios address the stabilization of the concentration
of GHG in the atmosphere.
Standards
Set of rules or codes mandating or defining product performance
(e.g., grades, dimensions, characteristics, test methods, and rules for
use). Product, technology or performance standards establish
minimum requirements for affected products or technologies.
Standards impose reductions in GHG emissions associated with
the manufacture or use of the products and/or application of the
technology.
Storyline
A narrative description of a scenario (or a family of scenarios) that
highlights the scenario’s main characteristics, relationships between
key driving forces, and the dynamics of the scenarios.
Structural change
Changes, for example, in the relative share of Gross Domestic
Product produced by the industrial, agricultural, or services sectors
of an economy; or more generally, systems transformations whereby
some components are either replaced or potentially substituted by
other ones.
Subsidy
Direct payment from the government or a tax reduction to a
private party for implementing a practice the government wishes
to encourage. The reduction of GHG emissions is stimulated by
lowering existing subsidies that have the effect of raising emissions
(such as subsidies to fossil fuel use) or by providing subsidies for
practices that reduce emissions or enhance sinks (e.g. for insulation
of buildings or for planting trees).
Sulphur hexafluoride (SF6)
One of the six greenhouse gases to be curbed under the Kyoto
Protocol. It is largely used in heavy industry to insulate high-voltage
equipment and to assist in the manufacturing of cable-cooling
systems and semi-conductors. Its Global Warming Potential is
,900.


Supplementarity
The Kyoto Protocol states that emissions trading and Joint
Implementation activities are to be supplemental to domestic
policies (e.g. energy taxes, fuel efficiency standards) taken by
developed countries to reduce their GHG emissions. Under some
proposed definitions of supplementarity (e.g., a concrete ceiling on
level of use), developed countries could be restricted in their use of
the Kyoto Mechanisms to achieve their reduction targets. This is a
subject for further negotiation and clarification by the parties.
Sustainable Development (SD)
The concept of sustainable development was introduced in the
World Conservation Strategy (IUCN 1980) and had its roots
in the concept of a sustainable society and in the management
of renewable resources. Adopted by the WCED in 1987 and
by the Rio Conference in 1992 as a process of change in which
the exploitation of resources, the direction of investments, the
orientation of technological development and institutional change
are all in harmony and enhance both current and future potential
to meet human needs and aspirations. SD integrates the political,
social, economic and environmental dimensions.
Targets and timetables
A target is the reduction of a specific percentage of GHG emissions
from a baseline date (e.g., below 1990 levels) to be achieved by a set
date or timetable (e.g., 2008-2012). Under the Kyoto Protocol the
EU agreed to reduce its GHG emissions by 8% below 1990 levels
by the 2008-2012 commitment period. Targets and timetables are
an emissions cap on the total amount of GHG emissions that can be
emitted by a country or region in a given time period.
Tax
A carbon tax is a levy on the carbon content of fossil fuels. Because
virtually all of the carbon in fossil fuels is ultimately emitted as
CO2, a carbon tax is equivalent to an emission tax on each unit of
CO2-equivalent emissions. An energy tax - a levy on the energy
content of fuels - reduces demand for energy and so reduces CO2
emissions from fossil fuel use. An eco-tax is designed to influence
human behaviour (specifically economic behaviour) to follow an
ecologically benign path.
An international carbon/emission/energy tax is a tax imposed
on specified sources in participating countries by an international
authority. The revenue is distributed or used as specified by this
authority or by participating countries. A harmonized tax commits
participating countries to impose a tax at a common rate on the same
sources, because imposing different rates across countries would
not be cost-effective. A tax credit is a reduction of tax in order
to stimulate purchasing of or investment in a certain product, like
GHG emission reducing technologies. A carbon charge is the same
as a carbon tax. See also Interaction effect
Technological change
Mostly considered as technological improvement, i.e., more or
better goods and services can be provided from a given amount
of resources (production factors). Economic models distinguish
autonomous (exogenous), endogenous and induced technological
change.
Autonomous (exogenous) technological change is imposed from
outside the model, usually in the form of a time trend affecting
energy demand or world output growth. Endogenous technological
change is the outcome of economic activity within the model, i.e.,
the choice of technologies is included within the model and affects
energy demand and/or economic growth. Induced technological
change implies endogenous technological change but adds further
changes induced by policies and measures, such as carbon taxes
triggering R&D efforts.
Technology
The practical application of knowledge to achieve particular tasks
that employs both technical artefacts (hardware, equipment) and
(social) information (‘software’, know-how for production and use
of artefacts).
Technology transfer
The exchange of knowledge, hardware and associated software,
money and goods among stakeholders, which leads to the spreading
of technology for adaptation or mitigation The term encompasses
both diffusion of technologies and technological cooperation across
and within countries.
Tolerable windows approach (TWA)
This approach seeks to identify the set of all climate-protection
strategies that are simultaneously compatible with 1) prescribed
long-term climate-protection goals, and 2) normative restrictions on
the emissions mitigation burden. The constraints may include limits
on the magnitude and rate of global mean temperature change, on
the weakening of the thermohaline circulation, on ecosystem losses
and on economic welfare losses resulting from selected climate
damages, adaptation costs and mitigation efforts. For a given set
of constraints, and given a solution exists, the TWA delineates an
emission corridor of complying emission paths.
Top-down models
Models applying macroeconomic theory, econometric and
optimization techniques to aggregate economic variables. Using
historical data on consumption, prices, incomes, and factor costs,
top-down models assess final demand for goods and services, and
supply from main sectors, such as the energy sector, transportation,
agriculture, and industry. Some top-down models incorporate
technology data, narrowing the gap to bottom-up models.
Trace gas
A minor constituent of the atmosphere, next to nitrogen and oxygen
that together make up 99% of all volume. The most important trace
gases contributing to the greenhouse effect are carbon dioxide, ozone,
methane, nitrous oxide, perfluorocarbons,
chlorofluorocarbons,
hydrofluorocarbons, sulphur hexafluoride and water vapour.
Tradable permit. See emission permit
Tradable quota system. See emissions trading.
Uncertainty
An expression of the degree to which a value is unknown (e.g. the
future state of the climate system). Uncertainty can result from lack
of information or from disagreement about what is known or even
knowable. It may have many types of sources, from quantifiable
errors in the data to ambiguously defined concepts or terminology, or
uncertain projections of human behavior. Uncertainty can therefore
be represented by quantitative measures (e.g., a range of values
calculated by various models) or by qualitative statements (e.g.,
reflecting the judgment of a team of experts). See also likelihood.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
The Convention was adopted on 9 May 1992 in New York and
signed at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro by more than
countries and the European Economic Community. Its ultimate
objective is the ‘stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the
atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic
interference with the climate system’. It contains commitments for
all parties. Under the Convention parties included in Annex I aimed
to return greenhouse gas emission not controlled by the Montreal
Protocol to 1990 levels by the year 2000. The convention came into
force in March 1994.


Value added
The net output of a sector or activity after adding up all outputs and
subtracting intermediate inputs.
Values
Worth, desirability or utility based on individual preferences. Most
social science disciplines use several definitions of value. Related
to nature and environment, there is a distinction between intrinsic
and instrumental values, the latter assigned by humans. Within
instrumental values, there is an unsettled catalogue of different
values, such as (direct and indirect) use, option, conservation,
serendipity, bequest, existence, etc.
Mainstream economics define the total value of any resource as the
sum of the values of the different individuals involved in the use
of the resource. The economic values, which are the foundation of
the estimation of costs, are measured in terms of the willingness to
pay by individuals to receive the resource or by the willingness of
individuals to accept payment to part with the resource. See also
contingent valuation method.
Voluntary action
Informal programmes, self-commitments and declarations, where
the parties (individual companies or groups of companies) entering
into the action set their own targets and often do their own monitoring
and reporting.
Voluntary agreement
An agreement between a government authority and one or more
private parties to achieve environmental objectives or to improve
environmental performance beyond compliance to regulated
obligations. Not all voluntary agreements are truly voluntary;
some include rewards and/or penalties associated with joining or
achieving commitments.