I Glossary, Acronyms, Chemical Symbols and Prefi xes Editors: Aviel Verbruggen (Belgium), William Moomaw (USA), John Nyboer (Canada) This annex should be cited as: Verbruggen, A., W. Moomaw, J. Nyboer, 2011: Annex I: Glossary, Acronyms, Chemical Symbols and Prefi xes. In IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation [O. Edenhofer, R. Pichs- Madruga, Y. Sokona, K. Seyboth, P. Matschoss, S. Kadner, T. Zwickel, P. Eickemeier, G. Hansen, S. Schlömer, C. von Stechow (eds)], Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. ANNEX

Glossary, Acronyms, Chemical Symbols and Prefi xes Annex I Glossary, Acronyms, Chemical Symbols and Prefi xes Glossary entries (highlighted in bold) are by preference subjects; a main entry can contain subentries, in bold italic, for example, Final Energy is defi ned under the entry Energy. The Glossary is followed by a list of acronyms/abbreviations, a list of chemical names and symbols, and a list of prefi xes (international standard units). Some defi nitions are adapted from C.J. Cleveland and C. Morris, 2006: Dictionary of Energy, Elsevier, Amsterdam. Defi nitions of regions and country groupings are given in Section A.II.6 of Annex II of this report. Glossary Adaptation: Initiatives and measures to reduce the vulnerability or increase the resilience of natural and human systems to actual or expected climate change impacts. Various types of adaptation exist, for example, anticipatory and reactive, private and public, and autonomous and planned. Examples are raising river or coastal dikes, retreating from coastal areas subject to fl ooding from sea level rise or introducing alternative temperature-appropriate or drought-adapted crops for conventional ones. Aerosols: A collection of airborne solid or liquid particles, typically between 0.01 and 10 μm in size and residing in the atmosphere for at least several hours. Aerosols may be of natural or anthropogenic origin. See also black carbon. Afforestation: Direct human-induced conversion of land that has not been forested historically to forested land through planting, seeding and/or the human-induced promotion of natural seed sources.1 See also deforestation, reforestation, land use. Annex I countries: The group of countries included in Annex I (as amended since Malta was added after that date) to the UNFCCC, including developed countries and some countries with economies in transition. Under Articles 4.2 (a) and 4.2 (b) of the Convention, Annex I countries were encouraged to return individually or jointly to their 1990 levels of greenhouse gas emissions by 2000. The group is largely similar to the Annex B countries to the Kyoto Protocol. By default, the other countries are referred to as Non-Annex I countries. See also UNFCCC, Kyoto Protocol. Annex B countries: This is the subset of Annex I countries that have specifi ed greenhouse gas reduction commitments under the Kyoto Protocol. The group is largely similar to the Annex I countries to the UNFCCC. By default, the other countries are referred to as Non-Annex I countries. See also UNFCCC, Kyoto Protocol. For a discussion of the term forest and related terms such as afforestation, reforestation and deforestation, see IPCC 2000: Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry, A Special Report of the IPCC [R.T. Watson, I.A. Noble, B. Bolin, N.H. Ravindranath, D.J. Verardo, D.J. Dokken (eds.)], Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. Anthropogenic: Related to or resulting from the infl uence of human beings on nature. Anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases, greenhouse gas precursors and aerosols result from burning fossil fuels, deforestation, land use changes, livestock, fertilization, industrial, commercial and other activities that result in a net increase in emissions. Availability (of a production plant): The percentage of time a plant is ready to produce, measured as uptime to total time (total time = uptime + downtime due to maintenance and outages). Balancing power/reserves: Due to instantaneous and short-term fl uctuations in electric loads and uncertain availability of power plants there is a constant need for spinning and quick-start generators that balance demand and supply at the imposed quality levels for frequency and voltage. Barrier: Any obstacle to developing and deploying a renewable energy (RE) potential that can be overcome or attenuated by a policy, programme or measure. Barriers to RE deployment are unintentional or intentionally constructed impediments made by man (e.g., badly oriented buildings or power grid access criteria that discriminate against independent RE generators). Distinct from barriers are issues like intrinsically natural properties impeding the application of some RE sources at some place or time (e.g., fl at land impedes hydropower and night the collection of direct solar energy). Barrier removal includes correcting market failures directly or reducing the transactions costs in the public and private sectors by, for example, improving institutional capacity, reducing risk and uncertainty, facilitating market transactions and enforcing regulatory policies. Baseline: The reference scenario for measurable quantities from which an alternative outcome can be measured, for example, a non-intervention scenario is used as a reference in the analysis of intervention scenarios. A baseline may be an extrapolation of recent trends, or it may assume frozen technology or costs. See also business as usual, models, scenario.

Benchmark: A measurable variable used as a baseline or reference in evaluating the performance of a technology, a system or an organization. Benchmarks may be drawn from internal experience, from external correspondences or from legal requirements and are often used to gauge changes in performance over time. Biodiversity: The variability among living organisms from all sources including, inter alia, terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they are part; this includes diversity within species, among species and of ecosystems. Bioenergy: Energy derived from any form of biomass. Biofuel: Any liquid, gaseous or solid fuel produced from biomass, for example, soybean oil, alcohol from fermented sugar, black liquor from the paper manufacturing process, wood as fuel, etc. Traditional biofuels include wood, dung, grass and agricultural residues. First-generation manufactured biofuel is derived from grains, oilseeds, animal fats and waste vegetable oils with mature conversion technologies. Second-generation biofuel uses non-traditional biochemical and thermochemical conversion processes and feedstock mostly derived from the lignocellulosic fractions of, for example, agricultural and forestry residues, municipal solid waste, etc. Third-generation biofuel would be derived from feedstocks like algae and energy crops by advanced processes still under development. These second- and third-generation biofuels produced through new processes are also referred to as next-generation or advanced biofuels or advanced biofuel technologies. Biomass: Material of biological origin (plants or animal matter), excluding material embedded in geological formations and transformed to fossil fuels or peat. The International Energy Agency (World Energy Outlook 2010) defi nes traditional biomass as biomass consumption in the residential sector in developing countries that refers to the often unsustainable use of wood, charcoal, agricultural residues and animal dung for cooking and heating. All other biomass use is defi ned as modern biomass, differentiated further by this report into two groups. Modern bioenergy encompasses electricity generation and combined heat and power (CHP) from biomass and municipal solid waste (MSW), biogas, residential space and hot water in buildings and commercial applications from biomass, MSW, and biogas, and liquid transport fuels. Industrial bioenergy applications include heating through steam generation and self generation of electricity and CHP in the pulp and paper industry, forest products, food and related industries. Black carbon: Operationally defi ned aerosol species based on measurement of light absorption and chemical reactivity and/or thermal stability; consists of soot, charcoal and/or light-absorbing refractory organic matter. Business as usual (BAU): The future is projected or predicted on the assumption that operating conditions and applied policies remain what they are at present. See also baseline, models, scenario. Capacity: In general, the facility to produce, perform, deploy or contain. Generation capacity of a renewable energy installation is the maximum power, that is, the maximum quantity of energy delivered per unit of time. Capacity credit is the share of the capacity of a renewable energy unit counted as guaranteed available during particular time periods and accepted as a ‘fi rm’ contribution to total system generation capacity. Capacity factor is the ratio of the actual output of a generating unit over a period of time (typically a year) to the theoretical output that would be produced if the unit were operating uninterruptedly at its nameplate capacity during the same period of time. Also known as rated capacity or nominal capacity, nameplate capacity is the facility’s intended output level for a sustained period under normal circumstances. Capacity building: In the context of climate change policies, the development of technical skills and institutional capability (the art of doing) and capacity (suffi cient means) of countries to enable their participation in all aspects of adaptation to, mitigation of and research on climate change. See also mitigation capacity. Carbon cycle: Describes the fl ow of carbon (in various forms, e.g., carbon dioxide, methane, etc) through the atmosphere, oceans, terrestrial biosphere and lithosphere. Carbon dioxide (CO2): CO2 is a naturally occurring gas and a by-product of burning fossil fuels or biomass, of land use changes and of industrial processes. It is the principal anthropogenic greenhouse gas that affects Earth’s radiative balance. It is the reference gas against which other greenhouse gases are measured and therefore it has a global warming potential of 1. Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS): CO2 from industrial and energy-related sources is separated, compressed and transported to a storage location for long-term isolation from the atmosphere. Cellulose: The principal chemical constituent of the cell walls of plants and the source of fi brous materials for the manufacturing of various

Glossary, Acronyms, Chemical Symbols and Prefi xes Annex I goods like paper, rayon, cellophane, etc. It is the main input for manufacturing second-generation biofuels. Clean Development Mechanism (CDM): A mechanism under the Kyoto Protocol through which developed (Annex B) countries may fi nance greenhouse gas emission reduction or removal projects in developing (Non-Annex B) countries, and receive credits for doing so which they may apply for meeting mandatory limits on their own emissions. Climate Change: Climate change refers to a change in the state of the climate that can be identifi ed (e.g. using statistical tests) by changes in the mean and/or the variability of these properties and that persists for an extended period, typically decades or longer. Climate change may be due to natural internal processes or external forcings, or to persistent anthropogenic changes in the composition of the atmosphere or in land use. Note that Article 1 of the UNFCCC defi nes ‘climate change’ as “a change of climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate variability observed over comparable time periods”. The UNFCCC thus makes a distinction between ‘climate change’ attributable to human activities altering atmospheric composition, and ‘climate variability’ attributable to natural causes. CO2-equivalent emission (CO2eq): The amount of CO2 emission that would cause the same radiative forcing as an emitted amount of a greenhouse gas or of a mixture of greenhouse gases, all multiplied by their respective global warming potentials, which take into account the differing times they remain in the atmosphere. See also global warming potential. Co-benefi ts: The ancillary benefi ts of targeted policies that accrue to non-targeted, valuable objectives, for example, a wider use of renewable energy may also reduce air pollutants while lowering CO2 emissions. Different defi nitions exist in the literature with co-benefi ts either being addressed intentionally (character of an opportunity) or gained unintentionally (character of a windfall profi t). The term co-impact is more generic in covering both benefi ts and costs. See also drivers and opportunities. Cogeneration: At thermal electricity generation plants otherwise wasted heat is utilized. The heat from steam turbines or hot fl ue gases exhausted from gas turbines may be used for industrial purposes, heating water or buildings or for district heating. Also referred to as combined heat and power (CHP). Combined-cycle gas turbine (CCGT): A power plant that combines two processes for generating electricity. First, gas or light fuel oil feeds a gas turbine that exhausts hot fl ue gases (> 600°C). Second, heat recovered from these gases, with additional fi ring, is the source for producing steam that drives a steam turbine. The turbines rotate separate alternators. It becomes an integrated CCGT when the fuel is syngas from a coal or biomass gasifi cation reactor with exchange of energy fl ows between the gasifi cation and CCGT plants. Compliance: Compliance is whether and to what extent countries adhere to the provisions of an accord or individuals or fi rms adhere to regulations. Compliance depends on implementing policies ordered, and on whether measures follow up the policies. Conversion: Energy shows itself in numerous ways, with transformations from one type to another called energy conversions. For example, kinetic energy in wind fl ows is captured as rotating shaft work further converted to electricity; solar light is converted into electricity by photovoltaic cells. Also, electric currents of given characteristics (e.g., direct/ alternating, voltage level) are converted to currents with other characteristics. A converter is the equipment used to realize the conversion. Cost: The consumption of resources such as labour time, capital, materials, fuels, etc. as the consequence of an action. In economics, all resources are valued at their opportunity cost, which is the value of the most valuable alternative use of the resources. Costs are defi ned in a variety of ways and under a variety of assumptions that affect their value. The negative of costs are benefi ts and often both are considered together, for example, net cost is the difference between gross costs and benefi ts. Private costs are carried by individuals, companies or other entities that undertake the action. Social costs include additionally the external costs for the environment and for society as a whole, for example, damage costs of impacts on ecosystems, economies and people due to climate change. Total cost includes all costs due to a specifi c activity; average (unit, specifi c) cost is total costs divided by the number of units generated; marginal or incremental cost is the cost of the last additional unit. Project costs of a renewable energy project include investment cost (costs, discounted to the starting year of the project, of making the renewable energy device ready to commence production); operation and maintenance (O&M) costs (which occur during operation of the renewable energy facility); and decommissioning costs (which occur once the device has ceased production to restore the state of the site of production). Lifecycle costs include all of the above discounted to the starting year of a project. Levelized cost of energy (see Annex II) is the unique cost price of the outputs (US cent/kWh or USD/GJ) of a project that makes the

present value of the revenues (benefi ts) equal to the present value of the costs over the lifetime of the project. See also discounting and present value. There are many more categories of costs labelled with names that are often unclear and confusing, for example, installation costs may refer to the hardware equipment installed, or to the activities to put the equipment in place. Cost–benefi t analysis: Monetary measurement of all negative and positive impacts associated with a given action. Costs and benefi ts are compared in terms of their difference and/or ratio as an indicator of how a given investment or other policy effort pays off seen from the society’s point of view. Cost-effectiveness analysis: A reduction of cost–benefi t analysis in which all the costs of a portfolio of projects are assessed in relation to a fi xed policy goal. The policy goal in this case represents the benefi ts of the projects and all the other impacts are measured as costs or as negative costs (benefi ts). The policy goal can be, for example, realizing particular renewable energy potentials. Deforestation: The natural or anthropogenic process that converts forest land to non-forest. See also afforestation, reforestation and land use. Demand-side management: Policies and programmes for infl uencing the demand for goods and/or services. In the energy sector, demandside management aims at reducing the demand for electricity and other forms of energy required to deliver energy services. Density: Quantity or mass per unit volume, unit area or unit length. Energy density is the amount of energy per unit volume or mass (for example, the heating value of a litre of oil). Power density is typically understood as the capacity deliverable of solar, wind, biomass, hydropower or ocean power per unit area (watts/m2). For batteries the capacity per unit weight (watts/kg) is used. Direct solar energy - See solar energy Discounting: A mathematical operation making monetary (or other) amounts received or expended at different points in time (years) comparable across time (see Annex II). The operator uses a fi xed or possibly time-varying discount rate (>0) from year to year that makes future value worth less today. A descriptive discounting approach accepts the discount rates that people (savers and investors) actually apply in their day-to-day decisions (private discount rate). In a prescriptive (ethical or normative) discounting approach, the discount rate is fi xed from a social perspective, for example, based on an ethical judgement about the interests of future generations (social discount rate). In this report, potentials of renewable energy supplies are assessed using discount rates of 3, 7 and 10%. Dispatch (power dispatching / dispatchable): Electrical power systems that consist of many power supply units and grids are governed by system operators. They allow generators to supply power to the system for balancing demand and supply in a reliable and economical way. Generation units are fully dispatchable when they can be loaded from zero to their nameplate capacity without signifi cant delay. Not fully dispatchable are variable renewable sources that depend on natural currents, but also large-scale thermal plants with shallow ramping rates in changing their output. See also balancing, capacity, grid. District heating (DH): Hot water (steam in old systems) is distributed from central stations to buildings and industries in a densely occupied area (a district, a city or an industrialized area). The insulated two-pipe network functions like a water-based central heating system in a building. The central heat sources can be waste heat recovery from industrial processes, waste incineration plants, geothermal sources, cogeneration power plants or stand-alone boilers burning fossil fuels or biomass. More and more DH systems also provide cooling via cold water or slurries (district heating and cooling - DHC). Drivers: In a policy context, drivers provide an impetus and direction for initiating and supporting policy actions. The deployment of renewable energy is, for example, driven by concerns about climate change or energy security. In a more general sense, a driver is the leverage to bring about a reaction, for example, emissions are caused by fossil fuel consumption and/or economic growth. See also opportunities. Economies of scale (scale economies): The unit cost of an activity declines when the activity is extended, for example, more units are produced. Ecosystem: An open system of living organisms, interacting with each other and with their abiotic environment, that is capable of selfregulation to a certain degree. Depending on the focus of interest or study the extent of an ecosystem may range from very small spatial scales to the entire planet. Electricity: The fl ow of passing charge through a conductor, driven by a difference in voltage between the ends of the conductor. Electrical power is generated by work from heat in a gas or steam turbine or from wind, oceans or falling water, or produced directly from sunlight using a photovoltaic device or chemically in a fuel cell. Being a current, electricity cannot be stored and requires wires and cables for its transmission (see grid). Because electric current fl ows immediately, the demand for electricity must be matched by production in real time. Emissions: Dir ect emissions are released and attributed at points in a specifi c renewable energy chain, whether a sector, a technology or an activity. For example, methane emissions from decomposing submerged

Glossary, Acronyms, Chemical Symbols and Prefi xes Annex I organic materials in hydropower reservoirs, or the release of CO2 dissolved in hot water from geothermal plants, or CO2 from biomass combustion. Indirect emissions are due to activities outside the considered renewable energy chain but which are required to realize the renewable energy deployment. For example, emissions from increased production of fertilizers used in the cultivation of biofuel crops or emissions from displaced crop production or deforestation as the result of biofuel crops. Avoided emissions are emission reductions arising from mitigation measures like renewable energy deployment. Emission factor: An emission factor is the rate of emission per unit of activity, output or input. Emissions trading: A market-based instrument to reduce greenhouse gas or other emissions. The environmental objective or sum of total allowed emissions is expressed as an emissions cap. The cap is divided in tradable emission permits that are allocated—either by auctioning or handing out for free (grandfathering)—to entities within the jurisdiction of the trading scheme. Entities need to surrender emission permits equal to the amount of their emissions (e.g., tonnes of CO2 ). An entity may sell excess permits. Trading schemes may occur at the intra-company, domestic or international level and may apply to CO2 , other greenhouse gases or other substances. Emissions trading is also one of the mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol. Energy: The amount of work or heat delivered. Energy is classifi ed in a variety of types and becomes available to human ends when it fl ows from one place to another or is converted from one type into another. Daily, the sun supplies large fl ows of radiation energy. Part of that energy is used directly, while part undergoes several conversions creating water evaporation, winds, etc. Some share is stored in biomass or rivers that can be harvested. Some share is directly usable such as daylight, ventilation or ambient heat. Primary energy (also referred to as energy sources) is the energy embodied in natural resources (e.g., coal, crude oil, natural gas, uranium, and renewable sources). It is defi ned in several alternative ways. The International Energy Agency utilizes the physical energy content method, which defi nes primary energy as energy that has not undergone any anthropogenic conversion. The method used in this report is the direct equivalent method (see Annex II), which counts one unit of secondary energy provided from non-combustible sources as one unit of primary energy, but treats combustion energy as the energy potential contained in fuels prior to treatment or combustion. Primary energy is transformed into secondary energy by cleaning (natural gas), refi ning (crude oil to oil products) or by conversion into electricity or heat. When the secondary energy is delivered at the end-use facilities it is called fi nal energy (e.g., electricity at the wall outlet), where it becomes usable energy in supplying services (e.g., light). Embodied energy is the energy used to produce a material substance (such as processed metals or building materials), taking into account energy used at the manufacturing facility (zero order), energy used in producing the materials that are used in the manufacturing facility (fi rst order), and so on. Renewable energy (RE) is any form of energy from solar, geophysical or biological sources that is replenished by natural processes at a rate that equals or exceeds its rate of use. Renewable energy is obtained from the continuing or repetitive fl ows of energy occurring in the natural environment and includes low-carbon technologies such as solar energy, hydropower, wind, tide and waves and ocean thermal energy, as well as renewable fuels such as biomass. For a more detailed description see specifi c renewable energy types in this glossary, for example, biomass, solar, hydropower, ocean, geothermal and wind. Energy access: People are provided the ability to benefi t from affordable, clean and reliable energy services for basic human needs (cooking and heating, lighting, communication, mobility) and productive uses. Energy carrier: A substance for delivering mechanical work or transfer of heat. Examples of energy carriers include: solid, liquid or gaseous fuels (e.g., biomass, coal, oil, natural gas, hydrogen); pressurized/heated/ cooled fl uids (air, water, steam); and electric current. Energy effi ciency: The ratio of useful energy or other useful physical outputs obtained from a system, conversion process, transmission or storage activity to the input of energy (measured as kWh/kWh, tonnes/ kWh or any other physical measure of useful output like tonne-km transported, etc.). Energy effi ciency is a component of energy intensity. Energy intensity: The ratio of energy inputs (in Joules) to the economic output (in dollars) that absorbed the energy input. Energy intensity is the reciprocal of energy productivity. At the national level, energy intensity is the ratio of total domestic primary (or fi nal) energy use to gross domestic product (GDP). The energy intensity of an economy is the weighted sum of the energy intensities of particular activities with the activities’ shares in GDP as weights. Energy intensities are obtained from available statistics (International Energy Agency, International Monetary Fund) and published annually for most countries in the world. Energy intensity is also used as a name for the ratio of energy inputs to output or performance in physical terms (e.g., tonnes of steel output, tonne-km transported, etc.) and in such cases, is the reciprocal of energy effi ciency. Energy productivity: The reciprocal of energy intensity. Energy savings: Decreasing energy intensity by changing the activities that demand energy inputs. Energy savings can be realized by technical,

organizational, institutional and structural actions and by changed behaviour. Energy security: The goal of a given country, or the global community as a whole, to maintain an adequate energy supply. Measures encompass safeguarding access to energy resources; enabling development and deployment of technologies; building suffi cient infrastructure to generate, store and transmit energy supplies; ensuring enforceable contracts of delivery; and access to energy at affordable prices for a specifi c society or groups in society. Energy services: Energy services are the tasks to be performed using energy. A specifi c energy service such as lighting may be supplied by a number of different means from daylighting to oil lamps to incandescent, fl uorescent or light-emitting diode devices. The amount of energy used to provide a service may vary over a factor of 10 or more, and the corresponding greenhouse gas emissions may vary from zero to a very high value depending on the source of energy and the type of end-use device. Energy transfer: Energy is transferred as work, light or heat. Heat transfer spontaneously occurs from objects at higher temperature to objects at lower temperature and is classifi ed as conduction (when the objects have contact), convection (when a fl uid like air or water takes the heat from the warmer object and is moved to the colder object to deliver the heat) and radiation (when heat travels through space in the form of electromagnetic waves). Externality / external cost / external benefi t: Externalities arise from a human activity, when agents responsible for the activity do not take full account of the activity’s impact on others’ production and consumption possibilities, and no compensation exists for such impacts. When the impact is negative, they are external costs. When positive they are referred to as external benefi ts. Feed-in tariff: The price per unit of electricity that a utility or power supplier has to pay for distributed or renewable electricity fed into the grid by non-utility generators. A public authority regulates the tariff. There may also be a tariff for supporting renewable heat supplies. Financing: Raising or providing money or capital by individuals, businesses, banks, venture funds, public instances, etc. for realizing a project or continuing an activity. Depending on the fi nancier the money is raised and is provided differently. For example, businesses may raise money from internal company profi ts, debt or equity (shares). Project fi nancing of renewable energy may be provided by fi nanciers to distinct, single-purpose companies, whose renewable energy sales are usually guaranteed by power purchase agreements. Non-recourse fi nancing is known as off-balance sheet since the fi nanciers rely on the certainty of project cash fl ows to pay back the loan, not on the creditworthiness of the project developer. Public equity fi nancing is capital provided for publicly listed companies. Private equity fi nancing is capital provided directly to private companies. Corporate fi nancing by banks via debt obligations uses ‘onbalance sheet’ assets as collateral and is therefore limited by the debt ratio of companies that must rationalize each additional loan with other capital needs. Fiscal incentive: Actors (individuals, households, companies) are granted a reduction of their contribution to the public treasury via income or other taxes. Fuel cell: A fuel cell generates electricity in a direct and continuous way from the controlled electrochemical reaction of hydrogen or another fuel and oxygen. With hydrogen as fuel it emits only water and heat (no CO2) and the heat can be utilized (see cogeneration). General equilibrium models: General equilibrium models consider simultaneously all the markets and feedback effects among them in an economy leading to market clearance. Generation control: Generation of electricity at a renewable energy plant may be subject to various controls. Active control is a deliberate intervention in the functioning of a system (for example, wind turbine pitch control: changing the orientation of the blades for varying a wind turbine’s output). Passive control is when natural forces adjust the functioning of a system (for example, wind turbine stall control: the design of the blade shape such that at a desired speed the blade spills the wind in order to automatically control the wind turbine’s output). Geothermal energy: Accessible thermal energy stored in the Earth’s interior, in both rock and trapped steam or liquid water (hydrothermal resources), which may be used to generate electric energy in a thermal power plant, or to supply heat to any process requiring it. The main sources of geothermal energy are the residual energy available from planet formation and the energy continuously generated from radionuclide decay. Geothermal gradient: Rate at which the Earth’s temperature increases with depth, indicating heat fl owing from the Earth’s warm interior to its colder parts. Global warming potential (GWP): GWP is an index, based upon radiative properties of well-mixed greenhouse gases, measuring the radiative forcing of a unit mass of a given well-mixed greenhouse gas in today’s atmosphere integrated over a chosen time horizon, relative

Glossary, Acronyms, Chemical Symbols and Prefi xes Annex I to that of CO2. The GWP represents the combined effect of the differing lengths of time that these gases remain in the atmosphere and their relative effectiveness in absorbing outgoing infrared radiation. The Kyoto Protocol ranks greenhouse gases on the basis of GWPs from single pulse emissions over subsequent 100-year time frames. See also climate change and CO2- equivalent emission. Governance: Governance is a comprehensive and inclusive concept of the full range of means for deciding, managing and implementing policies and measures. Whereas government is defi ned strictly in terms of the nation-state, the more inclusive concept of governance, recognizes the contributions of various levels of government (global, international, regional, local) and the contributing roles of the private sector, of nongovernmental actors and of civil society to addressing the many types of issues facing the global community. Greenhouse gases (GHGs): Greenhouse gases are those gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, both natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation at specifi c wavelengths within the spectrum of thermal infrared radiation emitted by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere and clouds. This property causes the greenhouse effect. Water vapour (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2 ), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4 ) and ozone (O3) are the primary greenhouse gases in the Earth’s atmosphere. Moreover, there are a number of entirely human-made greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, such as the halocarbons and other chlorine- and bromine-containing substances, dealt with under the Montreal Protocol. Besides CO2 , N2O and CH4 , the Kyoto Protocol deals with the greenhouse gases sulphur hexafl uoride (SF6 ), hydrofl uorocarbons (HFCs) and perfl uorocarbons (PFCs). Grid (electric grid, electricity grid, power grid): A network consisting of wires, switches and transformers to transmit electricity from power sources to power users. A large network is layered from low-voltage (110-240 V) distribution, over intermediate voltage (1-50 kV) to high-voltage (above 50 kV to MV) transport subsystems. Interconnected grids cover large areas up to continents. The grid is a power exchange platform enhancing supply reliability and economies of scale. Grid connection for a power producer is mostly crucial for economical operation. Grid codes are technical conditions for equipment and operation that a power producer must obey for getting supply access to the grid; also consumer connections must respect technical rules. Grid access refers to the acceptance of power producers to deliver to the grid. Grid integration accommodates power production from a portfolio of diverse and some variable generation sources in a balanced power system. See also transmission and distribution. Gross Domestic Product (GDP): The sum of gross value added, at purchasers’ prices, by all resident and non-resident producers in the economy, plus any taxes and minus any subsidies not included in the value of the products in a country or a geographic region for a given period, normally one year. It is calculated without deducting for depreciation of fabricated assets or depletion and degradation of natural resources. Heat exchanger: Devices for effi cient heat transfer from one medium to another without mixing the hot and cold fl ows, for example, radiators, boilers, steam generators, condensers. Heat pump: Installation that transfers heat from a colder to a hotter place, opposite to the natural direction of heat fl ows (see energy transfer). Technically similar to a refrigerator, heat pumps are used to extract heat from ambient environments like the ground (geothermal or ground source), water or air. Heat pumps can be inverted to provide cooling in summer. Human Development Index (HDI): The HDI allows the assessment of countries’ progress regarding social and economic development as a composite index of three indicators: 1) health measured by life expectancy at birth; 2) knowledge as measured by a combination of the adult literacy rate and the combined primary, secondary and tertiary school enrolment ratio; and 3) standard of living as gross domestic product per capita (in purchasing power parity). The HDI only acts as a broad proxy for some of the key issues of human development; for instance, it does not refl ect issues such as political participation or gender inequalities. Hybrid vehicle: Any vehicle that employs two sources of propulsion, most commonly a vehicle that combines an internal combustion engine with an electric motor and storage batteries. Hydropower: The energy of water moving from higher to lower elevations that is converted into mechanical energy through a turbine or other device that is either used directly for mechanical work or more commonly to operate a generator that produces electricity. The term is also used to describe the kinetic energy of stream fl ow that may also be converted into mechanical energy of a generator through an in-stream turbine to produce electricity. Informal sector/economy: The informal sector/economy is broadly characterized as comprising production units that operate at a small scale and at a low level of organization, with little or no division between labour and capital as factors of production, and with the primary objective of generating income and employment for the persons concerned. The economic activity of the informal sector is not accounted for in determining sectoral or national economic activity. Institution: A structure, a mechanism of social order or cooperation, which governs the behaviour of a group of individuals within a human

community. Institutions are intended to be functionally relevant for an extended period, able to help transcend individual interests and help govern cooperative human behaviour. The term can be extended to also cover regulations, technology standards, certifi cation and the like. Integrated assessment: A method of analysis that combines results and models from the physical, biological, economic and social sciences, and the interactions between these components in a consistent framework to evaluate the status and the consequences of environmental change and the policy responses to it. See also models. Kyoto Protocol: The Kyoto Protocol to the UNFCCC was adopted at the Third Session of the Conference of the Parties in 1997 in Kyoto. It contains legally binding commitments, in addition to those included in the UNFCCC. Annex B countries agreed to reduce their anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions (CO2, methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofl uorocarbons, perfl uorocarbons and sulphur hexafl uoride) by at least 5% below levels in the commitment period 2008 to 2012. The Kyoto Protocol came into force on 16 February 2005. See also UNFCCC. Land use (change; direct and indirect): The total of arrangements, activities and inputs undertaken in a certain land cover type. The social and economic purposes for which land is managed (e.g., grazing, timber extraction and conservation). Land use change occurs whenever land is transformed from one use to another, for example, from forest to agricultural land or to urban areas. Since different land types have different carbon storage potential (e.g., higher for forests than for agricultural or urban areas), land use changes may lead to net emissions or to carbon uptake. Indirect land use change refers to market-mediated or policydriven shifts in land use that cannot be directly attributed to land use management decisions of individuals or groups. For example, if agricultural land is diverted to fuel production, forest clearance may occur elsewhere to replace the former agricultural production. See also afforestation, deforestation and reforestation. Landfi ll: A solid waste disposal site where waste is deposited below, at or above ground level. Limited to engineered sites with cover materials, controlled placement of waste and management of liquids and gases. It excludes uncontrolled waste disposal. Landfi lls often release methane, CO2 and other gases as organic materials decay. Leapfrogging: The ability of developing countries to bypass intermediate technologies and jump straight to advanced clean technologies. Leapfrogging can enable developing countries to move to a low-emissions development trajectory. Learning curve / rate: Decreasing cost-prices of renewable energy supplies shown as a function of increasing (total or yearly) supplies. Learning improves technologies and processes over time due to experience, as production increases and/or with increasing research and development. The learning rate is the percent decrease of the cost-price for every doubling of the cumulative supplies (also called progress ratio). Levelized cost of energy – See Cost. Lifecycle analysis (LCA): LCA aims to compare the full range of environmental damages of any given product, technology, or service (see Annex II). LCA usually includes raw material input, energy requirements, and waste and emissions production. This includes operation of the technology/facility/ product as well as all upstream processes (i.e., those occurring prior to when the technology/facility/product commences operation) and downstream processes (i.e., those occurring after the useful lifetime of the technology/ facility/product), as in the ‘cradle to grave’ approach. Load (electrical): The demand for electricity by (thousands to millions) power users at the same moment aggregated and raised by the losses in transport and delivery, and to be supplied by the integrated power supply system. Load levelling reduces the amplitude of the load fl uctuations over time. Load shedding occurs when available generation or transmission capacity is insuffi cient to meet the aggregated loads. Peak load is the maximum load observed over a given period of time (day, week, year) and of short duration. Base load is power continuously demanded over the period. Loans: Loans are money that public or private lenders provide to borrowers mandated to pay back the nominal sum increased with interest payments. Soft loans (also called soft fi nancing or concessional funding) offer fl exible or lenient terms for repayment, usually at lower than market interest rates or no interest. Soft loans are provided customarily by government agencies and not by fi nancial institutions. Convertible loans entitle the lender to convert the loan to common or preferred stock (ordinary or preference shares) at a specifi ed conversion rate and within a specifi ed time frame. Lock-in: Technologies that cover large market shares continue to be used due to factors such as sunk investment costs, related infrastructure development, use of complementary technologies and associated social and institutional habits and structures. Carbon lock-in means that the established technologies and practices are carbon intensive.

Glossary, Acronyms, Chemical Symbols and Prefi xes Annex I Low-carbon technology: A technology that over its lifecycle causes very low to zero CO2eq emissions. See emissions. Market failure: When private decisions are based on market prices that do not refl ect the real scarcity of goods and services, they do not generate an effi cient allocation of resources but cause welfare losses. Factors causing market prices to deviate from real economic scarcity are environmental externalities, public goods and monopoly power. Measures: In climate policy, measures are technologies, processes or practices that reduce greenhouse gas emissions or impacts below anticipated future levels, for example renewable energy technologies, waste minimization processes, public transport commuting practices, etc. See also policies. Merit order (of power plants): Ranking of all available power generating units in an integrated power system, being the sequence of their short-run marginal cost per kWh starting with the cheapest for delivering electricity to the grid. Millennium Development Goals (MDG): A set of eight time-bound and measurable goals for combating poverty, hunger, disease, illiteracy, discrimination against women and environmental degradation. These were agreed to at the UN Millennium Summit in 2000 together with an action plan to reach these goals. Mitigation: Technological change and changes in activities that reduce resource inputs and emissions per unit of output. Although several social, economic and technological policies would produce an emission reduction, with respect to climate change, mitigation means implementing policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance sinks. Renewable energy deployment is a mitigation option when avoided greenhouse gas emissions exceed the sum of direct and indirect emissions (see emissions). Mitigation capacity is a country’s ability to reduce anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions or to enhance natural sinks, where ability refers to skills, competencies, fi tness and profi ciencies that a country has attained and depends on technology, institutions, wealth, equity, infrastructure and information. Mitigation capacity is rooted in a country’s sustainable development path. Models: Models are structured imitations of a system’s attributes and mechanisms to mimic appearance or functioning of systems, for example, the climate, the economy of a country, or a crop. Mathematical models assemble (many) variables and relations (often in a computer code) to simulate system functioning and performance for variations in parameters and inputs. Bottom-up models aggregate technological, engineering and cost details of specifi c activities and processes. Top-down models apply macroeconomic theory, econometric and optimization techniques to aggregate economic variables, like total consumption, prices, incomes and factor costs. Hybrid models integrate bottom-up and top-down models to some degree. Non-Annex I countries – See Annex I countries. Non-Annex B countries – See Annex B countries. Ocean energy: Energy obtained from the ocean via waves, tidal ranges, tidal and ocean currents, and thermal and saline gradients (note: submarine geothermal energy is covered under geothermal energy and marine biomass is covered under biomass energy). Offset (in climate policy): A unit of CO2-equivalent (CO2eq) that is reduced, avoided or sequestered to compensate for emissions occurring elsewhere. Opportunities: In general: conditions that allow for advancement, progress or profi t. In the policy context, circumstances for action with the attribute of a chance character. For example, the anticipation of additional benefi ts that may go along with the deployment of renewable energy (enhanced energy access and energy security, reduced local air pollution) but are not intentionally targeted. See also co-benefi ts and drivers. Path dependence: Outcomes of a process are conditioned by previous decisions, events and outcomes, rather than only by current actions. Choices based on transitory conditions can exert a persistent impact long after those conditions have changed. Payback: Mostly used in investment appraisal as fi nancial payback, which is the time needed to repay the initial investment by the returns of a project. A payback gap exists when, for example, private investors and micro-fi nancing schemes require higher profi tability rates from renewable energy projects than from fossil-fi red ones. Imposing an x-times higher fi nancial return on renewable energy investments is equivalent to imposing an x-times higher technical performance hurdle on delivery by novel renewable solutions compared to incumbent energy expansion. Energy payback is the time an energy project needs to deliver as much energy as had been used for setting the project online. Carbon payback is the time a renewable energy project needs to deliver as much net greenhouse gas savings (with respect to the fossil reference energy system) as its realization has caused greenhouse gas emissions from a perspective of lifecycle analysis (including land use changes and loss of terrestrial carbon stocks). Photosynthesis: The production of carbohydrates in plants, algae and some bacteria using the energy of light. CO2 is used as the carbon source.

Photovoltaics (PV): The technology of converting light energy directly into electricity by mobilizing electrons in solid state devices. The specially prepared thin sheet semiconductors are called PV cells. See solar energy. Policies: Policies are taken and/or mandated by a government—often in conjunction with business and industry within a single country, or collectively with other countries—to accelerate mitigation and adaptation measures. Examples of policies are support mechanisms for renewable energy supplies, carbon or energy taxes, fuel effi ciency standards for automobiles, etc. Common and co-ordinated or harmonized policies refer to those adopted jointly by parties. See also measures. Policy criteria: General: a standard on which a judgment or decision may be based. In the context of policies and policy instruments to support renewable energy, four inclusive criteria are common: Effectiveness (effi cacy) is the extent to which intended objectives are met, for instance the actual increase in the output of renewable electricity generated or shares of renewable energy in total energy supplies within a specifi ed time period. Beyond quantitative targets, this may include factors such as achieved degrees of technological diversity (promotion of different renewable energy technologies) or of spatial diversity (geographical distribution of renewable energy supplies). Effi ciency is the ratio of outcomes to inputs, for example, renewable energy targets realized for economic resources spent, mostly measured at one point of time (static effi ciency), also called costeffectiveness. Dynamic effi ciency adds a future time dimension by including how much innovation is triggered to improve the ratio of outcomes to inputs. Equity covers the incidence and distributional consequences of a policy, including fairness, justice and respect for the rights of indigenous peoples. The equity criterion looks at the distribution of costs and benefi ts of a policy and at the inclusion and participation of wide ranges of different stakeholders (e.g., local populations, independent power producers). Institutional feasibility is the extent to which a policy or policy instrument is seen as legitimate, able to gain acceptance, and able to be adopted and implemented. It covers administrative feasibility when compatible with the available information base and administrative capacity, legal structure and economic realities. Political feasibility needs acceptance and support by stakeholders, organizations and constituencies, and compatibility with prevailing cultures and traditions. Polluter pays principle: In 1972 the OECD agreed that polluters should pay the costs of abating the own environmental pollution, for example by installation of fi lters, sanitation plants and other add-on techniques. This is the narrow defi nition. The extended defi nition is when polluters would additionally pay for the damage caused by their residual pollution (eventually also historical pollution). Another extension is the precautionary polluter pays principle where potential polluters are mandated to take insurance or preventive measures for pollution that may occur in the future. The acronym PPP has also other meanings, such as Preventing Pollution Pays-off, Public Private Partnership, or Purchasing Power Parity. Portfolio analysis: Examination of a collection of assets or policies that are characterized by different risks and payoffs. The objective function is built up around the variability of returns and their risks, leading up to the decision rule to choose the portfolio with highest expected return. Potential: Several levels of renewable energy supply potentials can be identifi ed, although every level may span a broad range. In this report, resource potential encompasses all levels for a specifi c renewable energy resource. Market potential is the amount of renewable energy output expected to occur under forecast market conditions, shaped by private economic agents and regulated by public authorities. Private economic agents realize private objectives within given, perceived and expected conditions. Market potentials are based on expected private revenues and expenditures, calculated at private prices (incorporating subsidies, levies and rents) and with private discount rates. The private context is partly shaped by public authority policies. Economic potential is the amount of renewable energy output projected when all social costs and benefi ts related to that output are included, there is full transparency of information, and assuming exchanges in the economy install a general equilibrium characterized by spatial and temporal effi ciency. Negative externalities and co-benefi ts of all energy uses and of other economic activities are priced. Social discount rates balance the interests of consecutive human generations. Sustainable development potential is the amount of renewable energy output that would be obtained in an ideal setting of perfect economic markets, optimal social (institutional and governance) systems and achievement of the sustainable fl ow of environmental goods and services. This is distinct from economic potential because it explicitly addresses inter- and intra-generational equity (distribution) and governance issues. Technical potential is the amount of renewable energy output obtainable by full implementation of demonstrated technologies or practices. No explicit reference to costs, barriers or policies is made.

Glossary, Acronyms, Chemical Symbols and Prefi xes Annex I Technical potentials reported in the literature being assessed in this report, however, may have taken into account practical constraints and when explicitly stated there, they are generally indicated in the underlying report. Theoretical potential is derived from natural and climatic (physical) parameters (e.g., total solar irradiation on a continent’s surface). The theoretical potential can be quantifi ed with reasonable accuracy, but the information is of limited practical relevance. It represents the upper limit of what can be produced from an energy resource based on physical principles and current scientifi c knowledge. It does not take into account energy losses during the conversion process necessary to make use of the resource, nor any kind of barriers. Power: Power is the rate in which energy is transferred or converted per unit of time or the rate at which work is done. It is expressed in watts (joules/second). Present value: The value of a money amount differs when the amount is available at different moments in time (years). To make amounts at differing times comparable and additive, a date is fi xed as the ‘present.’ Amounts available at different dates in the future are discounted back to a present value, and summed to get the present value of a series of future cash fl ows. Net present value is the difference between the present value of the revenues (benefi ts) and the present value of the costs. See also discounting. Project cost – see Cost. Progress ratio – see Learning curve / rate. Public fi nance: Public support for which a fi nancial return is expected (loans, equity) or fi nancial liability is incurred (guarantee). Public good: Public goods are simultaneously used by several parties (opposite to private goods). Some public goods are fully free from rivalry in use; for others the use by some subtract from the availability for others, creating congestion. Access to public goods may be restricted dependent on whether public goods are commons, state-owned or res nullius (no one’s case). The atmosphere and climate are the ultimate public goods of mankind. Many renewable energy sources are also public goods. Public-private partnerships: Arrangements typifi ed by joint working between the public and private sector. In the broadest sense, they cover all types of collaboration across the interface between the public and private sectors to deliver services or infrastructure. Quota (on renewable electricity/energy): Established quotas obligate designated parties (generators or suppliers) to meet minimum (often gradually increasing) renewable energy targets, generally expressed as percentages of total supplies or as an amount of renewable energy capacity, with costs borne by consumers. Various countries use different names for quotas, for example, Renewable Portfolio Standards, Renewable Obligations. See also tradable certifi cates Reactive power: The part of instantaneous power that does no real work. Its function is to establish and sustain the electric and magnetic fi elds required to let active power perform useful work. Rebound effect: After implementation of effi cient technologies and practices, part of the expected energy savings is not realized because the accompanying savings in energy bills may be used to acquire more energy services. For example, improvements in car engine effi ciency lower the cost per kilometre driven, encouraging consumers to drive more often or longer distances, or to spend the saved money on other energy-consuming activities. Successful energy effi ciency policies may lead to lower economy-wide energy demand and if so to lower energy prices with the possibility of the fi nancial savings stimulating rebound effects. The rebound effect is the ratio of non-realized energy and resource savings compared to the potential savings in case consumption would have remained constant as before the effi ciency measures were implemented. For climate change, the main concern about rebound effects is their impact on CO2 emissions (carbon rebound). Reforestation: Direct human-induced conversion of non-forested land to forested land through planting, seeding and/or the human-induced promotion of natural seed sources, on land that was previously forested but converted to non-forested land. See also afforestation, deforestation and land use. Regulation: A rule or order issued by governmental executive authorities or regulatory agencies and having the force of law. Regulations implement policies and are mostly specifi c for particular groups of people, legal entities or targeted activities. Regulation is also the act of designing and imposing rules or orders. Informational, transactional, administrative and political constraints in practice limit the regulator’s capability for implementing preferred policies. Reliability: In general: reliability is the degree of performance according to imposed standards or expectations. Electrical reliability is the absence of unplanned interruptions of the current by, for example, shortage of supply capacity or by failures in parts of the grid. Reliability differs from security and from fl uctuations in power quality due to impulses or harmonics. Renewable energy – see Energy Scenario: A plausible description of how the future may develop based on a coherent and internally consistent set of assumptions about key relationships and driving forces (e.g., rate of technological change, prices) on social and economic development, energy use, etc. Note that scenarios are neither predictions nor forecasts, but are useful to provide a view of the implications of alternative developments and actions. See also baseline, business as usual, models.

Seismicity: The distribution and frequency of earthquakes in time, magnitude and space, for example, the yearly number of earthquakes of magnitude between 5 and 6 per 100 km2 or in some region. Sink: Any process, activity or mechanism that removes a greenhouse gas or aerosol, or a precursor of a greenhouse gas or aerosol, from the atmosphere. Solar collector: A device for converting solar energy to thermal energy (heat) of a fl owing fl uid. Solar energy: Energy from the Sun that is captured either as heat, as light that is converted into chemical energy by natural or artifi cial photosynthesis, or by photovoltaic panels and converted directly into electricity. Concentrating solar power (CSP) systems use either lenses or mirrors to capture large amounts of solar energy and focus it down to a smaller region of space. The higher temperatures produced can operate a thermal steam turbine or be used in high-temperature industrial processes. Direct solar energy refers to the use of solar energy as it arrives at the Earth’s surface before it is stored in water or soils. Solar thermal is the use of direct solar energy for heat end-uses, excluding CSP. Active solar needs equipment like panels, pumps and fans to collect and distribute the energy. Passive solar is based on structural design and construction techniques that enable buildings to utilize solar energy for heating, cooling and lighting by non-mechanical means. Solar irradiance: The rate of solar power incidence on a surface (W/ m2). Irradiance depends on the orientation of the surface, with as special orientations: (a) surfaces perpendicular to the beam solar radiation; (b) surfaces horizontal with or on the ground. Full sun is solar irradiance that is approximately 1,000 W/m2. Solar radiation: The sun radiates light and heat energy in wavelengths from ultraviolet to infrared. Radiation arriving at surfaces may be absorbed, refl ected or transmitted. Global solar radiation consists of beam (arriving on Earth in a straight line) and diffuse radiation (arriving on Earth after being scattered by the atmosphere and by clouds). Standards: Set of rules or codes mandating or defi ning product performance (e.g., grades, dimensions, characteristics, test methods and rules for use). Product, technology or performance standards establish minimum requirements for affected products or technologies. Subsidy: Direct payment from the government or a tax reduction to a private party for implementing a practice the government wishes to encourage. The reduction of greenhouse gas emissions is stimulated by lowering existing subsidies that have the effect of raising emissions (such as subsidies for fossil fuel use) or by providing subsidies for practices that reduce emissions or enhance sinks (e.g., renewable energy projects, insulation of buildings or planting trees). Sustainable development (SD): The concept of sustainable development was introduced in the World Conservation Strategy of the International Union for Conservation of Nature in 1980 and had its roots in the concept of a sustainable society and in the management of renewable resources. Adopted by the World Council for Environment and Development in 1987 and by the Rio Conference in 1992 as a process of change in which the exploitation of resources, the direction of investments, the orientation of technological development and institutional change are all in harmony and enhance both current and future potential to meet human needs and aspirations. SD integrates the political, social, economic and environmental dimensions, and respects resource and sink constraints. Tax: A carbon tax is a levy on the carbon content of fossil fuels. Because virtually all of the carbon in fossil fuels is ultimately emitted as CO2, a carbon tax is equivalent to an emission tax on CO2 emissions. An energy tax—a levy on the energy content of fuels—reduces demand for energy and so reduces CO2 emissions from fossil fuel use. An ecotax is a carbon, emissions or energy tax designed to infl uence human behaviour (specifi cally economic behaviour) to follow an ecologically benign path. A tax credit is a reduction of tax in order to stimulate purchasing of or investment in a certain product, like greenhouse gas emission-reducing technologies. A levy or charge is used as synonymous for tax. Technological change: Mostly considered as technological improvement, that is, more or better goods and services can be provided from a given amount of resources (production factors). Economic models distinguish autonomous (exogenous), endogenous and induced technological change. Autonomous (exogenous) technological change is imposed from outside the model (i.e., as a parameter), usually in the form of a time trend affecting factor or/and energy productivity and therefore energy demand or output growth. Endogenous technological change is the outcome of economic activity within the model (i.e., as a variable) so that factor productivity or the choice of technologies is included within the model and affects energy demand and/or economic growth.

Glossary, Acronyms, Chemical Symbols and Prefi xes Annex I Induced technological change implies endogenous technological change but adds further changes induced by policies and measures, such as carbon taxes triggering research and development efforts. Technology: The practical application of knowledge to achieve particular tasks that employs both technical artefacts (hardware, equipment) and (social) information (‘software’, know-how for production and use of artefacts). Supply push aims at developing specifi c technologies through support for research, development and demonstration. Demand pull is the practice of creating market and other incentives to induce the introduction of particular sets of technologies (e.g., low-carbon technologies through carbon pricing) or single technologies (e.g., through technology-specifi c feed-in tariffs). Technology transfer: The exchange of knowledge, hardware and associated software, money and goods among stakeholders, which leads to the spread of technology for adaptation or mitigation. The term encompasses both diffusion of technologies and technological cooperation across and within countries. Tradable certifi cates (tradable green certifi cates): Parties subject to a renewable energy quota meet the annual obligation by delivering the appropriate amount of tradable certifi cates to a regulatory offi ce. The certifi cates are created by the offi ce and assigned to the renewable energy producers to sell or for their own use in fulfi lling their quota. See quota. Transmission and distribution (electricity): The network that transmits electricity through wires from where it is generated to where it is used. The distribution system refers to the lower-voltage system that actually delivers the electricity to the end user. See also grid. Turbine: Equipment that converts the kinetic energy of a fl ow of air, water, hot gas or steam into rotary mechanical power, used for direct drive or electricity generation (see wind, hydro, gas or steam turbines). Condensing steam turbines exhaust depleted steam in a heat exchanger (called condenser) using ambient cooling from water (river, lake, sea) or air sources (cooling towers). A backpressure steam turbine has no condenser at ambient temperature conditions, but exhausts all steam at higher temperatures for use in particular heat end-uses. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC): The Convention was adopted on 9 May 1992 in New York and signed at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro by more than 150 countries and the European Economic Community. Its ultimate objective is the “stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system”. It contains commitments for all parties. Under the Convention, parties included in Annex I aimed to return greenhouse gas emissions not controlled by the Montreal Protocol to 1990 levels by the year 2000. The convention came into force in March 1994. In 1997, the UNFCCC adopted the Kyoto Protocol. See also Annex I countries, Annex B countries and Kyoto Protocol. Valley of death: Expression for a phase in the development of some technology when it is generating a large and negative cash fl ow because development costs increase but the risks associated with the technology are not reduced enough to entice private investors to take on the fi nancing burden. Value added: The net output of a sector or activity after adding up all outputs and subtracting intermediate inputs. Values: Worth, desirability or utility based on individual preferences. Most social science disciplines use several defi nitions of value. Related to nature and environment, there is a distinction between intrinsic and instrumental values, the latter assigned by humans. Within instrumental values, there is an unsettled catalogue of different values, such as (direct and indirect) use, option, conservation, serendipity, bequest, existence, etc. Mainstream economics defi ne the total value of any resource as the sum of the values of the different individuals involved in the use of the resource. The economic values, which are the foundation of the estimation of costs, are measured in terms of the willingness to pay by individuals to receive the resource or by the willingness of individuals to accept payment to part with the resource. Vent (geothermal/hydrothermal/submarine): An opening at the surface of the Earth (terrestrial or submarine) through which materials and energy fl ow. Venture capital: A type of private equity capital typically provided for early-stage, high-potential technology companies in the interest of generating a return on investment through a trade sale of the company or an eventual listing on a public stock exchange. Well-to-tank (WTT): WTT includes activities from resource extraction through fuel production to delivery of the fuel to vehicle. Compared to WTW, WTT does not take into consideration fuel use in vehicle operations. Well-to-wheel (WTW): WTW analysis refers to specifi c lifecycle analysis applied to transportation fuels and their use in vehicles. The WTW stage includes resource extraction, fuel production, delivery of the fuel

to vehicle, and end use of fuel in vehicle operations. Although feedstocks for alternative fuels do not necessarily come from a well, the WTW terminology is adopted for transportation fuel analysis. Wind energy: Kinetic energy from air currents arising from uneven heating of the Earth’s surface. A wind turbine is a rotating machine including its support structure for converting the kinetic energy to mechanical shaft energy to generate electricity. A windmill has oblique vanes or sails and the mechanical power obtained is mostly used directly, for example, for water pumping. A wind farm, wind project or wind power plant is a group of wind turbines interconnected to a common utility system through a system of transformers, distribution lines, and (usually) one substation.

Glossary, Acronyms, Chemical Symbols and Prefi xes Annex I Acronyms AA-CAES Advanced adiabatic compressed air energy storage AC Alternating current AEM Anion exchange membrane AEPC Alternative Energy Promotion Centre AFEX Ammonia fi bre expansion APU Auxiliary power unit AR4 4th assessment report (of the IPCC) AR5 5th assessment report (of the IPCC) BC Black carbon BCCS Biological carbon sequestration Bio-CCS Biomass with carbon capture and storage BIPV Building-integrated photovoltaic BMU Bundesministerium für Umwelt, Naturschutz und Reaktorsicherheit (German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety) BNEF Bloomberg New Energy Finance BOS Balance of systems BSI Better Sugarcane Initiative CAES Compressed air energy storage CBP Consolidated bioprocessing CC Combined cycle CCIY China Coal Industry Yearbook CCS Carbon dioxide capture and storage CDM Clean Development Mechanism CEM Cation exchange membrane CER Certifi ed Emissions Reduction CF Capacity factor CFB Circulating fl uid bed CFD Computational fl uid dynamics CFL Compact fl uorescent lightbulb CHP Combined heat and power CIGSS Copper indium/gallium disulfi de/(di)selenide CIS Commonwealth of Independent States CMA China’s Meteorological Administration CNG Compressed natural gas CoC Chain of custody COP Coeffi cient of performance CPP Captive power plant CPV Concentrating photovoltaics CREZ Competitive renewable energy zone CRF Capital recovery factor CSIRO Commonwealth Scientifi c and Industrial Research Organisation CSP Concentrating solar power CPV Concentrating photovoltaics CSTD Commission on Science and Technology (UN) DALY Disability-adjusted life year dBA A-weighted decibels DC Direct current or district cooling DDG Distillers dried grains DDGS Distillers dried grains plus solubles DH District heating DHC District heating or cooling DHW Domestic hot water DLR Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (German Aerospace Centre) DLUC Direct land use change DME Dimethyl ether DNI Direct-normal irradiance DPH Domestic pellet heating DSSC Dye-sensitized solar cell EGS Enhanced geothermal systems EGTT Expert Group on Technology Transfer EIA Energy Information Administration (USA) EIT EMEC Economy In Transition European Marine Energy Centre EMF Energy Modelling Form EMI Electromagnetic interference ENSAD Energy-Related Severe Accident Database EPRI Electric Power Research Institute (USA) EPT Energy payback time E[R] Energy [R]evolution ER Energy ratio ERCOT Electric Reliability Council of Texas EREC European Renewable Energy Council EROEI Energy return on energy investment ESMAP Energy Sector Management Program (World Bank) ETBE Ethyl tert-butyl ether ETP Energy Technology Perspectives EU European Union EV Electric vehicle FACTS Flexible AC transmission system FASOM Forest and Agricultural Sector Optimization Model FAO Food and Agriculture Organization (of the UN) FFV Flexible fuel vehicle FQD Fuel quality directive FIT Feed-in tariff FOGIME Crediting System in Favour of Energy Management FRT Fault ride through FSU Former Soviet Union FTD Fischer-Tropsch diesel GBD Global burden of disease GBEP Global Bioenergy Partnership GCAM Global Change Assessment Model GCM Global climate model; General circulation model GDP GEF GHG GHP Gross domestic product Global Environment Facility Greenhouse gas Geothermal heat pump

GIS Geographic information system GM Genetically modifi ed GMO Genetically modifi ed organism GO Guarantee of origin GPI Genuine progress indicator GPS Global positioning system GSHP Ground source heat pump HANPP Human appropriation of terrestrial NPP HCE Heat collection element HDI Human Development Index HDR Hot dry rock HDV Heavy duty vehicle HFCV Hydrogen fuel cell electric vehicle HFR Hot fractured rock HHV Higher heating value HPP Hydropower plant HRV Heat recovery ventilator HEV Hybrid electric vehicle HVAC Heating, ventilation and air-conditioning HVDC High voltage direct current HWR Hot wet rock IA Impact assessment IAP Indoor air pollution IBC interdigitated back-contact ICE Internal combustion engine ICEV Internal combustion engine vehicle ICLEI Local Governments for Sustainability ICOLD International Commission on Large Dams ICS Improved cookstove or Integral collector storage (Ch 3) ICTSD International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development IEA International Energy Agency IEC International Electrotechnical Commission IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IHA International Hydropower Association ILUC Indirect land use change IGCC Integrated gasifi cation combined cycle IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPR Intellectual property rights IQR Inter-quartile range IREDA Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency IRM Inorganic mineral raw materials ISCC Integrated solar combined-cycle ISES International Solar Energy Society ISEW Index of sustainable economic welfare ISO International Organization for Standardization J Joule JI Joint implementation LCA Lifecycle assessment LCOE Levelized cost of energy (or of electricity) LCOF Levelized cost of fuel LCOH Levelized cost of heat LDV Light duty vehicle LED Light-emitting diode LHV Lower heating value LNG Liquefi ed natural gas LPG Liquefi ed petroleum gas LR Learning rate LUC Land use change M&A Mergers and acquisitions MDG Millennium Development Goals MEH Multiple-effect humidifi cation MHS Micro-hydropower systems MITI Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Japan) MSW Municipal solid waste NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration (USA) NDRC National Development and Reform Commission (China) NFFO Non Fossil Fuel Obligation NG Natural gas NGO Nongovernmental organization Nm3 Normal cubic metre (of gas) at standard temperature and pressure NMVOC Non-methane volatile organic compounds NPP Net primary production NPV Net present value NRC National Research Council (USA) NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory (USA) NSDS National Sustainable Development Strategies O&M Operation and maintenance OB Oscillating-body OC Organic carbon OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development OM Organic matter OPV Organic photovoltaic ORC Organic Rankine Cycle OTEC Ocean thermal energy conversion OWC Oscillating water column PACE Property Assessed Clean Energy PBR Photobioreactor PCM Phase-change material PDI Power density index PEC Photoelectrochemical PHEV Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle PM Particulate matter POME Palm oil mill effl uent PPA Purchase power agreement PRO PROALCOOL PSA PSI Pressure-retarded osmosis Brazilian Alcohol Program Probabilistic safety assessment Paul Scherrer Institute PSP Pumped storage plants PTC Production tax credit PV Photovoltaic

Glossary, Acronyms, Chemical Symbols and Prefi xes Annex I PV/T Photovoltaic/thermal PWR Pressurized water reactor R&D Research and development RBMK Reaktor bolshoy moshchnosty kanalny RCM Regional climate model RD&D Research, development and demonstration R/P Reserves to current production (ratio) RD Renewable diesel RE Renewable energy RE-C Renewable energy cooling RE-H Renewable energy heating RE-H/C Renewable energy heating/cooling REC Renewable energy certifi cate RED Reversed electro dialysis REN21 Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 21st Century RES Renewable electricity standard RM&U Renovation, modernization and upgrading RMS Root mean square RNA Rotor nacelle assembly RO Renewables obligation RoR Run of river RPS Renewable portfolio standard RSB Roundtable for Sustainable Biofuels SCADA Supervisory control and data acquisition SCC Stress corrosion cracking SD Sustainable development SEGS Solar Electric Generating Station (California) SHC Solar heating and cooling SHP Small-scale hydropower plant SI Suitability index SME Small and medium sized enterprises SNG Synthesis gas SNV Netherlands Development Organization SPF Seasonal performance factor SPM Summary for Policymakers SPP Small power producer SPS Sanitary and phytosanitary SR Short rotation SRES Special Report on Emission Scenarios (of the IPCC) SRREN Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation (of the IPCC) SSCF Simultaneous saccharifi cation and co-fermentation SSF Simultaneous saccharifi cation and fermentation SSP Space-based solar power STP Standard temperature and pressure SWH Solar water heating TBM Tunnel-boring machines TERM Tonga Energy Roadmap TGC Tradable green certifi cate TPA Third-party access TPES Total primary energy supply TPWind European Wind Energy Technology Platform TS Technical Summary or thermosyphon US United States of America (adjective) USA United States of America (noun) UN United Nations UNCED United Nations Conference on Environment and Development UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNEP United Nations Environment Programme UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change USD US dollar USDOE US Department of Energy V Volt VKT Vehicle kilometres travelled VRB Vanadium redox battery W Watt We Watt of electricity Wp Watt peak of PV installation WBG World Bank Group WCD World Commission on Dams WCED World Commission on Environment and Development WEA World Energy Assessment WEO World Energy Outlook WindPACT Wind Partnership for Advanced Component Technologies WTO World Trade Organization WTW Well to wheel

Prefi xes (International Standard Units) Symbol Multiplier Prefi x Symbol Multiplier Prefi x Z 10 21 zetta d 10 -1 deci E 1018 exa c 10 -2 centi P 1015 peta m 10 -3 milli T 1012 tera μ 10 -6 micro G 10 9 giga n 10 -9 nano M 10 6 mega p 10 -12 pico k 10 3 kilo f 10 -15 femto h 10 2 hecto a 10 -18 atto da 10 deca Chemical Symbols a-Si Amorphous silicon C Carbon CdS Cadmium sulphide CdTe Cadmium telluride CH4 Methane CH3CH2OH Ethanol CH3OCH3 Dimethyl ether (DME) CH3OH Methanol CIGS(S) Copper indium gallium diselenide (disulfi de) Cl Chlorine CO Carbon monoxide CO2 Carbon dioxide CO2eq Carbon dioxide equivalent c-Si Crystalline silicon Cu Copper CuInSe2 Copper indium diselenide DME Dimethyl ether Fe Iron GaAs Gallium arsenide H2 Hydrogen gas H2O Water H2S Hydrogen sulphide HFC Hydrofl uorocarbons K Potassium Mg Magnesium N Nitrogen N2 Nitrogen gas N2O Nitrous oxide Na Sodium NaS Sodium-sulfur NH3 Ammonia Ni Nickel NiCd Nickel-cadmium NOX Nitrous oxides O3 Ozone P Phosphorus PFC Perfl uorocarbon SF6 Sulfur hexafl uoride Si Silicon SiC Silicon carbide SO2 Sulfur dioxide ZnO Zinc oxide

Glossary, Acronyms, Chemical Symbols and Prefi xes Annex I