AI Annex I: Glossary
This annex should be cited as:
IPCC, 2019: Annex I: Glossary [van Diemen, R. (ed.)]. In: Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special report on climate
change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in
terrestrial ecosystems [P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, E. Calvo Buendia, V. Masson-Delmotte, H.-O. Pörtner, D. C. Roberts, P. Zhai,
R. Slade, S. Connors, R. van Diemen, M. Ferrat, E. Haughey, S. Luz, S. Neogi, M. Pathak, J. Petzold, J. Portugal Pereira,
P. Vyas, E. Huntley, K. Kissick, M. Belkacemi, J. Malley, (eds.)]. In press.
Coordinating Editor:
Renée van Diemen (The Netherlands/United Kingdom)
Editorial Team:
Tim Benton (United Kingdom), Eduardo Calvo (Peru), Annette Cowie (Australia), Valérie
Masson-Delmotte (France), Aziz Elbehri (Morocco), Karlheinz Erb (Italy), Giacomo Grassi (Italy/
European Union), J.B. Robin Matthews (United Kingdom), Hans-Otto Pörtner (Germany), Andy
Reisinger (New Zealand), Debra Roberts (South Africa), Priyadarshi Shukla (India), Andrey Sirin
(The Russian Federation), Jim Skea (United Kingdom), Murat Türkeş (Turkey), Nora M. Weyer
(Germany), Sumaya Zakieldeen (Sudan), Panmao Zhai (China)
Notes:
Note that subterms are in italics beneath main terms.
This glossary defines some specific terms as the Lead Authors intend them to be interpreted in
the context of this report. Blue, italicised words indicate that the term is defined in the Glossary.



.5°C pathway See Pathways.
Agenda for Sustainable Development A UN resolution
in September 2015 adopting a plan of action for people, planet and
prosperity in a new global development framework anchored in 17
Sustainable Development Goals (UN, 2015).
Acceptability of policy or system change The extent to
which a policy or system change is evaluated unfavourably or
favourably, or rejected or supported, by members of the general
public (public acceptability) or politicians or governments (political
acceptability). Acceptability may vary from totally unacceptable/fully
rejected to totally acceptable/fully supported; individuals may differ
in how acceptable policies or system changes are believed to be.
Acclimatisation A change in functional or morphological traits
occurring once or repeatedly (e.g., seasonally) during the lifetime
of an individual organism in its natural environment. Through
acclimatisation the individual maintains performance across a range
of environmental conditions. For a clear differentiation between
findings in laboratory and field studies, the term acclimation is used
in ecophysiology for the respective phenomena when observed in
well-defined experimental settings. The term (adaptive) plasticity
characterises the generally limited scope of changes in phenotype
that an individual can reach through the process of acclimatisation.
Activity A practice or ensemble of practices that take place on
a delineated area over a given period of time.
Activity data Data on the magnitude of a human activity resulting
in emissions or removals taking place during a given period of time. In
the Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) sector, data on
area of different land uses, management systems, animal numbers,
lime and fertiliser use are examples of activity data.
Adaptability See Adaptive capacity.
Adaptation In human systems, the process of adjustment to
actual or expected climate and its effects, in order to moderate harm
or exploit beneficial opportunities. In natural systems, the process of
adjustment to actual climate and its effects; human intervention may
facilitate adjustment to expected climate and its effects.
Incremental adaptation
Adaptation that maintains the essence and integrity of a system or
process at a given scale (Park et al., 2012).
Transformational adaptation
Adaptation that changes the fundamental attributes of a socialecological
system in anticipation of climate change and its impacts.
Adaptation limits
The point at which an actor’s objectives (or system needs) cannot be
secured from intolerable risks through adaptive actions.
• Hard adaptation limit: No adaptive actions are possible to avoid
intolerable risks.
• Soft adaptation limit: Options are currently not available to
avoid intolerable risks through adaptive action.
See also Adaptation options, Adaptive capacity and Maladaptive
actions (Maladaptation).
Adaptation behaviour See Human behaviour.
Adaptation limits See Adaptation.
Adaptation options The array of strategies and measures
that are available and appropriate for addressing adaptation. They
include a wide range of actions that can be categorised as structural,
institutional, ecological or behavioural. See also Adaptive capacity,
and Maladaptive actions (Maladaptation).
Adaptation pathways See Pathways
Adaptive capacity The ability of systems, institutions, humans
and other organisms to adjust to potential damage, to take advantage
of opportunities, or to respond to consequences (IPCC, 2014; MA,
). See also Adaptation, Adaptation options, and Maladaptive
actions (Maladaptation).
Adaptive governance See Governance.
Adverse side-effect The negative effects that a policy or
measure aimed at one objective might have on other objectives,
without yet evaluating the net effect on overall social welfare.
Adverse side-effects are often subject to uncertainty and depend on,
among others, local circumstances and implementation practices. See
also Co-benefits and Risk.
Aerosol A suspension of airborne solid or liquid particles, with
a typical size between a few nanometres and 10 μm that reside in the
atmosphere for at least several hours. The term aerosol, which includes
both the particles and the suspending gas, is often used in this report
in its plural form to mean aerosol particles. Aerosols may be of either
natural or anthropogenic origin. Aerosols may influence climate in
several ways: through both interactions that scatter and/or absorb
radiation and through interactions with cloud microphysics and other
cloud properties, or upon deposition on snow or ice covered surfaces
thereby altering their albedo and contributing to climate feedback.
Atmospheric aerosols, whether natural or anthropogenic, originate
from two different pathways: emissions of primary particulate matter
(PM), and formation of secondary PM from gaseous precursors. The
bulk of aerosols are of natural origin. Some scientists use group
labels that refer to the chemical composition, namely: sea salt,
organic carbon, black carbon (BC), mineral species (mainly desert
dust), sulphate, nitrate, and ammonium. These labels are, however,
imperfect as aerosols combine particles to create complex mixtures.
See also Short-lived climate forcers (SLCF).
Afforestation Conversion to forest of land that historically has
not contained forests. [Note: For a discussion of the term forest and
related terms such as afforestation, reforestation and deforestation, in
the context of reporting and accounting Article 3.3 and 3.4 activities
under the Kyoto Protocol, see 2013 Revised Supplementary Methods
and Good Practice Guidance Arising from the Kyoto Protocol.] See
also Reforestation, Deforestation, Forest and Reducing Emissions
from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+).
Agreement In this report, the degree of agreement within the
scientific body of knowledge on a particular finding is assessed
based on multiple lines of evidence (e.g., mechanistic understanding,
theory, data, models, expert judgement) and expressed qualitatively
(Mastrandrea et al., 2010). See also Confidence, Likelihood,
and Uncertainty.

Glossary Annex I
AI
Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) In the
context of national greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories under the
United Nations Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), AFOLU is
the sum of the GHG inventory sectors Agriculture and Land Use, Land-
Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF); see the 2006 IPCC Guidelines
for National GHG Inventories for details. Given the difference in
estimating the ‘anthropogenic’ carbon dioxide (CO2) removals
between countries and the global modelling community, the landrelated
net GHG emissions from global models included in this report
are not necessarily directly comparable with LULUCF estimates in
national GHG Inventories.
FOLU (Forestry and Other Land Use) – also referred to as LULUCF
The subset of AFOLU emissions and removals of greenhouse gases
(GHGs) resulting from direct human-induced land use, land-use
change, and forestry activities excluding agricultural emissions.
See also Land-Use Change (LUC) and Land Use, Land-Use Change and
Forestry (LULUCF).
Agrobiodiversity ‘The variety and variability of animals, plants
and micro-organisms that are used directly or indirectly for food
and agriculture, including crops, livestock, forestry and fisheries.
It comprises the diversity of genetic resources (varieties, breeds)
and species used for food, fodder, fibre, fuel and pharmaceuticals.
It also includes the diversity of non-harvested species that support
production (soil micro-organisms, predators, pollinators), and those
in the wider environment that support agro-ecosystems (agricultural,
pastoral, forest and aquatic) as well as the diversity of the agroecosystems’
(FAO, 2005).
Agroecology ‘The science and practice of applying ecological
concepts, principles and knowledge (i.e., the interactions of, and
explanations for, the diversity, abundance and activities of organisms)
to the study, design and management of sustainable agroecosystems.
It includes the roles of human beings as a central organism in
agroecology by way of social and economic processes in farming
systems. Agroecology examines the roles and interactions among
all relevant biophysical, technical and socioeconomic components of
farming systems and their surrounding landscapes’ (IPBES, 2019).
Agroforestry Collective name for land-use systems and
technologies where woody perennials (trees, shrubs, palms,
bamboos, etc.) are deliberately used on the same land-management
units as agricultural crops and/or animals, in some form of spatial
arrangement or temporal sequence. In agroforestry systems there
are both ecological and economical interactions between the
different components. Agroforestry can also be defined as a dynamic,
ecologically based, natural resource management system that,
through the integration of trees on farms and in the agricultural
landscape, diversifies and sustains production for increased social,
economic and environmental benefits for land users at all levels
(FAO, 2015a).
Air pollution Degradation of air quality with negative effects
on human health, the natural or built environment, due to the
introduction by natural processes or human activity in the atmosphere
of substances (gases, aerosols) which have a direct (primary
pollutants) or indirect (secondary pollutants) harmful effect. See also
Short-lived climate forcers (SLCF).
Albedo The proportion of sunlight (solar radiation) reflected by
a surface or object, often expressed as a percentage. Clouds, snow
and ice usually have high albedo; soil surfaces cover the albedo range
from high to low; vegetation in the dry season and/or in arid zones
can have high albedo, whereas photosynthetically active vegetation
and the ocean have low albedo. The Earth’s planetary albedo changes
mainly through varying cloudiness, snow, ice, leaf area and land
cover changes.
Ambient persuasive technology Technological systems
and environments that are designed to change human cognitive
processing, attitudes and behaviours without the need for the user’s
conscious attention.
Anomaly The deviation of a variable from its value averaged over
a reference period. See also Reference period.
Anthromes ‘Human systems, with natural ecosystems
embedded within them’ (Ellis and Ramankutty 2008). The anthrome
classification system is based on human population density and land
use, and comprises the following classes: dense settlements, villages,
croplands, rangeland, forested (then broadened to seminatural) and
wildlands (Ellis et al. 2010).
Anthropocene A proposed new geological epoch resulting from
significant human-driven changes to the structure and functioning of
the Earth System, including the climate system. Originally proposed
in the Earth System science community in 2000, the proposed new
epoch is undergoing a formalisation process within the geological
community based on the stratigraphic evidence that human activities
have changed the Earth System to the extent of forming geological
deposits with a signature that is distinct from those of the Holocene,
and which will remain in the geological record. Both the stratigraphic
and Earth System approaches to defining the Anthropocene consider
the mid-20th century to be the most appropriate starting date,
although others have been proposed and continue to be discussed.
The Anthropocene concept has been taken up by a diversity of
disciplines and the public to denote the substantive influence humans
have had on the state, dynamics and future of the Earth System. See
also Holocene.
Anthropogenic Resulting from or produced by human activities.
See also Anthropogenic emissions, and Anthropogenic removals.
Anthropogenic emissions Emissions of greenhouse gases
(GHGs), precursors of GHGs and aerosols caused by human activities.
These activities include the burning of fossil fuels, deforestation, land
use and land-use changes (LUC), livestock production, fertilisation,
waste management, and industrial processes. See also Anthropogenic,
and Anthropogenic removals.
Anthropogenic removals The withdrawal of greenhouse
gases (GHGs) from the atmosphere as a result of deliberate human
activities. These include enhancing biological sinks of CO2 and using
chemical engineering to achieve long term removal and storage.
Carbon capture and storage (CCS) from industrial and energy-related
sources, which alone does not remove CO2 from the atmosphere,
can help reduce atmospheric CO2 if it is combined with bioenergy
production (BECCS). [Note: In the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National
GHG Inventories, which are used in reporting of emissions to the
UNFCCC, 'anthropogenic’ land-related GHG fluxes are defined as all


those occurring on 'managed land’, i.e. ‘where human interventions
and practices have been applied to perform production, ecological or
social functions’. However, some removals (e.g. removals associated
with CO2 fertilisation and N deposition) are not considered as
‘anthropogenic’, or are referred to as ‘indirect’ anthropogenic
effects, in some of the scientific literature assessed in this report. As
a consequence, the land-related net GHG emission estimates from
global models included in this report are not necessarily directly
comparable with LULUCF estimates in national GHG Inventories.
See also Anthropogenic emissions, Bioenergy with carbon dioxide
capture and storage (BECCS), Carbon dioxide capture and storage
(CCS) and Land use, Land-use change, and Forestry (LULUCF).
Aridity The state of a long-term climatic feature characterised
by low average precipitation or available water in a region. Aridity
generally arises from widespread persistent atmospheric subsidence
or anticyclonic conditions, and from more localised subsidence
in the lee side of mountains (adapted from Gbeckor-Kove, 1989;
Türkeş, 1999).
Atmosphere The gaseous envelope surrounding the Earth, divided
into five layers — the troposphere which contains half of the Earth’s
atmosphere, the stratosphere, the mesosphere, the thermosphere,
and the exosphere, which is the outer limit of the atmosphere. The
dry atmosphere consists almost entirely of nitrogen (78.1% volume
mixing ratio) and oxygen (20.9% volume mixing ratio), together
with a number of trace gases, such as argon (0.93 % volume mixing
ratio), helium and radiatively active greenhouse gases (GHGs) such
as carbon dioxide (CO2) (0.04% volume mixing ratio) and ozone (O3).
In addition, the atmosphere contains the GHG water vapour (H2O),
whose amounts are highly variable but typically around 1% volume
mixing ratio. The atmosphere also contains clouds and aerosols. See
also Carbon dioxide (CO2), Ozone (O3), Troposphere, Stratosphere,
Greenhouse gas (GHG), and Hydrological cycle.
Atmosphere-ocean general circulation model
(AOGCM) See Climate model.
Atmospheric boundary layer The atmospheric layer adjacent
to the Earth’s surface that is affected by friction against that boundary
surface, and possibly by transport of heat and other variables across
that surface (AMS, 2000). The lowest 100 m of the boundary layer
(about 10% of the boundary layer thickness), where mechanical
generation of turbulence is dominant, is called the surface boundary
layer or surface layer.
Attribution See Detection and attribution.
Baseline scenario In much of the literature the term is also
synonymous with the term business-as-usual (BAU) scenario, although
the term BAU has fallen out of favour because the idea of business
as usual in century-long socio-economic projections is hard to
fathom. In the context of transformation pathways, the term baseline
scenarios refers to scenarios that are based on the assumption that
no mitigation policies or measures will be implemented beyond
those that are already in force and/or are legislated or planned to
be adopted. Baseline scenarios are not intended to be predictions
of the future, but rather counterfactual constructions that can serve
to highlight the level of emissions that would occur without further
policy effort. Typically, baseline scenarios are then compared to
mitigation scenarios that are constructed to meet different goals
for greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, atmospheric concentrations
or temperature change. The term baseline scenario is often used
interchangeably with reference scenario and no policy scenario. See
also Emission scenario, and Mitigation scenario.
Biochar Relatively stable, carbon-rich material produced by
heating biomass in an oxygen-limited environment. Biochar is
distinguished from charcoal by its application: biochar is used as
a soil amendment with the intention to improve soil functions and
to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from biomass that would
otherwise decompose rapidly (IBI, 2018).
Biodiversity Biodiversity or biological diversity means the
variability among living organisms from all sources including, among
other things, terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the
ecological complexes of which they are part; this includes diversity
within species, between species and of ecosystems (UN, 1992). See
also Ecosystem, and Ecosystem service.
Bioenergy Energy derived from any form of biomass or its
metabolic by-products. See also Biomass and Biofuel.
Bioenergy with carbon dioxide capture and storage
(BECCS) Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS) technology
applied to a bioenergy facility. Note that depending on the total
emissions of the BECCS supply chain, carbon dioxide (CO2) can be
removed from the atmosphere. See also Bioenergy, and Carbon
dioxide capture and storage (CCS).
Biofuel A fuel, generally in liquid form, produced from biomass.
Biofuels include bioethanol from sugarcane, sugar beet or maize, and
biodiesel from canola or soybeans. See also Biomass, and Bioenergy.
Biogeochemical effects Processes through which land affects
climate, excluding biophysical effects. These processes include
changes in net emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) towards the
atmosphere, net emissions of aerosols (mineral and organic), ozone
deposition on ecosystems, and net emissions of biogenic volatile
organic compounds (BVOCs) and their subsequent changes in
atmospheric chemistry. See also Biophysical effects.
Biomass Organic material excluding the material that is fossilised
or embedded in geological formations. Biomass may refer to the mass
of organic matter in a specific area (ISO, 2014). See also Bioenergy,
and Biofuel.
Traditional biomass
The combustion of wood, charcoal, agricultural residues and/or
animal dung for cooking or heating in open fires or in inefficient
stoves as is common in low-income countries.
Biome 'Global-scale zones, generally defined by the type of plant
life that they support in response to average rainfall and temperature
patterns. For example, tundra, coral reefs or savannas’ (IPBES, 2019).
Biophysical effects The range of physical processes through
which land affects climate. These processes include changes in
hydrology (e.g. water vapor fluxes at the land/atmosphere interface),
heat exchanges via convective fluxes (latent and sensible), radiation
(solar and infra-red, absorbed and emitted), and momentum (e.g.
affecting wind speed).

Glossary Annex I
AI
Black carbon (BC) A relatively pure form of carbon, also known
as soot, arising from the incomplete combustion of fossil fuels,
biofuel, and biomass. It stays in the atmosphere only for days or
weeks. Black carbon is a climate forcing agent with strong warming
effect, both in the atmosphere and when deposited on snow or ice.
See also Atmosphere, and Aerosol.
Blue carbon All biologically-driven carbon fluxes and storage
in marine systems that are amenable to management can be
considered as blue carbon. Coastal blue carbon focuses on rooted
vegetation in the coastal zone, such as tidal marshes, mangroves and
seagrasses. These ecosystems have high carbon burial rates on a per
unit area basis and accumulate carbon in their soils and sediments.
They provide many non-climatic benefits and can contribute to
ecosystem-based adaptation. If degraded or lost, coastal blue carbon
ecosystems are likely to release most of their carbon back to the
atmosphere. There is current debate regarding the application of the
blue carbon concept to other coastal and non-coastal processes and
ecosystems, including the open ocean. See also Ecosystem services,
and Carbon sequestration.
Business as usual (BAU) See Baseline scenario.
Carbon budget Refers to three concepts in the literature:
(1) an assessment of carbon cycle sources and sinks on a global
level, through the synthesis of evidence for fossil-fuel and cement
emissions, land-use change emissions, ocean and land CO2 sinks,
and the resulting atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) growth rate.
This is referred to as the global carbon budget; (2) the estimated
cumulative amount of global carbon dioxide emissions that that is
estimated to limit global surface temperature to a given level above
a reference period, taking into account global surface temperature
contributions of other greenhouse gases (GHGs) and climate forcers;
(3) the distribution of the carbon budget defined under (2) to the
regional, national, or sub-national level based on considerations of
equity, costs or efficiency. See also Remaining carbon budget.
Carbon cycle The flow of carbon (in various forms, e.g., as carbon
dioxide (CO2), carbon in biomass, and carbon dissolved in the ocean
as carbonate and bicarbonate) through the atmosphere, hydrosphere,
terrestrial and marine biosphere and lithosphere. In this report, the
reference unit for the global carbon cycle is GtCO2 or GtC (one
Gigatonne = 1 Gt = 1015 grams; 1GtC corresponds to 3.667 GtCO2).
Carbon dioxide (CO2) A naturally occurring gas, CO2 is also a byproduct
of burning fossil fuels (such as oil, gas and coal), of burning
biomass, of land-use changes (LUC) and of industrial processes (e.g.,
cement production). It is the principal anthropogenic greenhouse gas
(GHG) that affects the Earth’s radiative balance. It is the reference gas
against which other GHGs are measured and therefore has a Global
Warming Potential (GWP) of 1. See also Greenhouse gas (GHG), Land
use, and Land-use change.
Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS) A process in
which a relatively pure stream of carbon dioxide (CO2) from industrial
and energy-related sources is separated (captured), conditioned,
compressed and transported to a storage location for long-term
isolation from the atmosphere. Sometimes referred to as Carbon
Capture and Storage. See also Carbon dioxide capture and utilisation
(CCU), Bioenergy with carbon dioxide capture and storage (BECCS),
and Sequestration.
Carbon dioxide capture and utilisation (CCU) A process in
which carbon dioxide (CO2) is captured and then used to produce a
new product. If the CO2 is stored in a product for a climate-relevant
time horizon, this is referred to as carbon dioxide capture, utilisation
and storage (CCUS). Only then, and only combined with CO2 recently
removed from the atmosphere, can CCUS lead to carbon dioxide
removal. CCU is sometimes referred to as Carbon dioxide capture and
use. See also Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS).
Carbon dioxide capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) See
Carbon dioxide capture and utilisation (CCU).
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) Anthropogenic activities
removing carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere and durably
storing it in geological, terrestrial, or ocean reservoirs, or in products.
It includes existing and potential anthropogenic enhancement of
biological or geochemical sinks and direct air capture and storage,
but excludes natural CO2 uptake not directly caused by human
activities. See also Mitigation (of climate change), Greenhouse gas
removal (GGR), Negative emission technologies, and Sink.
Carbon intensity The amount of emissions of carbon dioxide
(CO2) released per unit of another variable such as gross domestic
product (GDP), output energy use or transport.
Carbon price The price for avoided or released carbon dioxide
(CO2) or CO2-equivalent emissions. This may refer to the rate of
a carbon tax, or the price of emission permits. In many models that
are used to assess the economic costs of mitigation, carbon prices are
used as a proxy to represent the level of effort in mitigation policies.
See also Mitigation.
Carbon sequestration The process of storing carbon in a carbon
pool. See also Blue carbon, Carbon dioxide capture and storage
(CCS), Uptake, and Sink.
Carbon sink See Sink.
Carbon stock The quantity of carbon in a carbon pool. See also
Pool, carbon and nitrogen.
Citizen science A voluntary participation of the public in the
collection and/or processing of data as part of a scientific study
(Silvertown, 2009).
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) A mechanism defined
under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol through which investors
(governments or companies) from developed (Annex B) countries
may finance greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction or removal
projects in developing countries (Non-Annex B), and receive Certified
Emission Reduction Units (CERs) for doing so. The CERs can be credited
towards the commitments of the respective developed countries.
The CDM is intended to facilitate the two objectives of promoting
sustainable development (SD) in developing countries and of helping
industrialised countries to reach their emissions commitments in
a cost-effective way.
Climate Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the
average weather, or more rigorously, as the statistical description in
terms of the mean and variability of relevant quantities over a period


of time ranging from months to thousands or millions of years. The
classical period for averaging these variables is 30 years, as defined
by the World Meteorological Organization. The relevant quantities
are most often surface variables such as temperature, precipitation
and wind. Climate in a wider sense is the state, including a statistical
description, of the climate system.
Climate change A change in the state of the climate that can be
identified (e.g., by using statistical tests) by changes in the mean and/
or the variability of its properties and that persists for an extended
period, typically decades or longer. Climate change may be due to
natural internal processes or external forcings such as modulations
of the solar cycles, volcanic eruptions and persistent anthropogenic
changes in the composition of the atmosphere or in land use. Note
that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC), in its Article 1, defines climate change as: ‘a change of
climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity
that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and which is
in addition to natural climate variability observed over comparable
time periods’. The UNFCCC thus makes a distinction between climate
change attributable to human activities altering the atmospheric
composition and climate variability attributable to natural causes.
See also Climate variability, Global warming, Ocean acidification, and
Detection and attribution.
Climate extreme (extreme weather or climate event) The
occurrence of a value of a weather or climate variable above (or
below) a threshold value near the upper (or lower) ends of the
range of observed values of the variable. For simplicity, both extreme
weather events and extreme climate events are referred to collectively
as ‘climate extremes.’ See also Extreme weather event.
Climate feedback An interaction in which a perturbation in
one climate quantity causes a change in a second and the change
in the second quantity ultimately leads to an additional change in
the first. A negative feedback is one in which the initial perturbation
is weakened by the changes it causes; a positive feedback is one in
which the initial perturbation is enhanced. The initial perturbation
can either be externally forced or arise as part of internal variability.
Climate governance See Governance.
Climate model A numerical representation of the climate
system based on the physical, chemical and biological properties
of its components, their interactions and feedback processes and
accounting for some of its known properties. The climate system
can be represented by models of varying complexity; that is, for
any one component or combination of components a spectrum or
hierarchy of models can be identified, differing in such aspects as
the number of spatial dimensions, the extent to which physical,
chemical or biological processes are explicitly represented, or the
level at which empirical parametrizations are involved. There is an
evolution towards more complex models with interactive chemistry
and biology. Climate models are applied as a research tool to study
and simulate the climate and for operational purposes, including
monthly, seasonal and interannual climate predictions. See also Earth
system model (ESM).
Climate projection Simulated response of the climate system
to a scenario of future emissions or concentrations of greenhouse
gases (GHGs) and aerosols, and changes in land use, generally
derived using climate models. Climate projections are distinguished
from climate predictions by their dependence on the emission/
concentration/radiative forcing scenario used, which is in turn based
on assumptions concerning, for example, future socioeconomic and
technological developments that may or may not be realised.
Climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs)
Trajectories that strengthen sustainable development and efforts to
eradicate poverty and reduce inequalities while promoting fair and
cross-scalar adaptation to and resilience in a changing climate. They
raise the ethics, equity, and feasibility aspects of the deep societal
transformation needed to drastically reduce emissions to limit global
warming (e.g., to 2°C) and achieve desirable and liveable futures and
well-being for all.
Climate-resilient pathways Iterative processes for managing
change within complex systems in order to reduce disruptions and
enhance opportunities associated with climate change. See also
Climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs), Development
pathways, Pathways, and Transformation pathways.
Climate sensitivity The change in the annual global mean
surface temperature in response to a change in the atmospheric
carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration or other radiative forcing.
Equilibrium climate sensitivity
An estimate of the global mean surface temperature response to
a doubling of the atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration
that is evaluated from model output or observations for evolving
non-equilibrium conditions. It is a measure of the strengths of the
climate feedbacks at a particular time and may vary with forcing
history and climate state, and therefore may differ from equilibrium
climate sensitivity.
Transient climate response
The change in the global mean surface temperature, averaged over
a 20-year period, centred at the time of atmospheric carbon dioxide
(CO2) doubling, in a climate model simulation in which CO2 increases
at 1% yr–1 from pre-industrial. It is a measure of the strength of
climate feedbacks and the timescale of ocean heat uptake.
See also Climate model, and Global mean surface temperature
(GMST).
Climate services Information and products that enhance users’
knowledge and understanding about the impacts of climate change
and/or climate variability so as to aid decision-making of individuals
and organisations and enable preparedness and early climate change
action. Such services involve high-quality data from national and
international databases on temperature, rainfall, wind, soil moisture
and ocean conditions, as well as maps, risk and vulnerability
analyses, assessments, and long-term projections and scenarios.
Depending on the user’s needs, these data and information products
may be combined with non-meteorological data, such as agricultural
production, health trends, population distributions in high-risk areas,
road and infrastructure maps for the delivery of goods, and other
socio-economic variables (WMO, 2019).
Climate-smart agriculture (CSA) An approach to agriculture
that aims to transform and reorient agricultural systems to effectively
support development and ensure food security in a changing climate

Glossary Annex I
AI
by: sustainably increasing agricultural productivity and incomes;
adapting and building resilience to climate change; and reducing and/
or removing greenhouse gas emissions, where possible (FAO, 2018).
Climate system The system consisting of five major components:
the atmosphere, the hydrosphere, the cryosphere, the lithosphere and
the biosphere and the interactions between them. The climate system
evolves in time under the influence of its own internal dynamics
and because of external forcings such as volcanic eruptions, solar
variations, orbital forcing, and anthropogenic forcings such as the
changing composition of the atmosphere and land-use change.
Climate target A temperature limit, concentration level,
or emissions reduction goal used towards the aim of avoiding
dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. For
example, national climate targets may aim to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions by a certain amount over a given time horizon, for example
those under the Kyoto Protocol.
Climate variability Variations in the mean state and other
statistics (such as standard deviations, the occurrence of extremes,
etc.) of the climate on all spatial and temporal scales beyond that
of individual weather events. Variability may be due to natural
internal processes within the climate system (internal variability), or
to variations in natural or anthropogenic external forcing (external
variability). See also Climate change.
CO2 equivalent (CO2-eq) emission The amount of carbon
dioxide (CO2) emission that would cause the same integrated
radiative forcing or temperature change, over a given time horizon, as
an emitted amount of a greenhouse gas (GHG) or a mixture of GHGs.
There are a number of ways to compute such equivalent emissions
and choose appropriate time horizons. Most typically, the CO2-
equivalent emission is obtained by multiplying the emission of a GHG
by its Global Warming Potential (GWP) for a 100 year time horizon.
For a mix of GHGs it is obtained by summing the CO2-equivalent
emissions of each gas. CO2-equivalent emission is a common scale
for comparing emissions of different GHGs but does not imply
equivalence of the corresponding climate change responses. There
is generally no connection between CO2-equivalent emissions and
resulting CO2-equivalent concentrations.
CO2 fertilisation The enhancement of plant growth as a result
of increased atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration.
The magnitude of CO2 fertilisation depends on nutrients and
water availability.
Co-benefits The positive effects that a policy or measure aimed
at one objective might have on other objectives, thereby increasing
the total benefits for society or the environment. Co-benefits are
often subject to uncertainty and depend on local circumstances
and implementation practices, among other factors. Co-benefits are
also referred to as ancillary benefits. See also Adverse side-effects,
and Risk.
Collective action A number of people working together
voluntarily to achieve some common objective (Meinzen-Dick and Di
Gregorio, 2004).
Conference of the Parties (COP) The supreme body of UN
conventions, such as the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC), comprising parties with a right to vote
that have ratified or acceded to the convention. See also United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD).
Confidence The robustness of a finding based on the type,
amount, quality and consistency of evidence (e.g., mechanistic
understanding, theory, data, models, expert judgment) and on the
degree of agreement across multiple lines of evidence. In this report,
confidence is expressed qualitatively (Mastrandrea et al., 2010). See
also Likelihood, and Uncertainty.
Convection Vertical motion driven by buoyancy forces arising
from static instability, usually caused by near-surface cooling or
increases in salinity in the case of the ocean and near-surface warming
or cloud-top radiative cooling in the case of the atmosphere. In the
atmosphere, convection gives rise to cumulus clouds and precipitation
and is effective at both scavenging and vertically transporting
chemical species. In the ocean, convection can carry surface waters
to deep within the ocean.
Coping capacity The ability of people, institutions, organisations,
and systems, using available skills, values, beliefs, resources, and
opportunities, to address, manage, and overcome adverse conditions
in the short to medium term. (UNISDR, 2009; IPCC, 2012a). See
also Resilience.
Cost-benefit analysis Monetary assessment of all negative
and positive impacts associated with a given action. Cost-benefit
analysis enables comparison of different interventions, investments
or strategies and reveal how a given investment or policy effort pays
off for a particular person, company or country. Cost-benefit analyses
representing society’s point of view are important for climate
change decision making, but there are difficulties in aggregating
costs and benefits across different actors and across timescales. See
also Discounting.
Cost-effectiveness A measure of the cost at which a policy
goal or outcome is achieved. The lower the cost the greater the
cost effectiveness.
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) A climate
modelling activity from the World Climate Research Programme
(WCRP) which coordinates and archives climate model simulations
based on shared model inputs by modelling groups from around
the world. The CMIP3 multi-model data set includes projections
using SRES scenarios. The CMIP5 data set includes projections using
the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs). The CMIP6
phase involves a suite of common model experiments as well as an
ensemble of CMIP-endorsed model intercomparison projects (MIPs).
Cumulative emissions The total amount of emissions released
over a specified period of time. See also Carbon budget.
Decarbonisation Process by which countries, individuals or other
entities aim to achieve zero fossil carbon existence. Typically refers
to a reduction of the carbon emissions associated with electricity,
industry and transport.
Decoupling Decoupling (in relation to climate change) is where
economic growth is no longer strongly associated with consumption
of fossil fuels. Relative decoupling is where both grow but at different


rates. Absolute decoupling is where economic growth happens but
fossil fuels decline.
Deforestation Conversion of forest to non-forest. [Note: For
a discussion of the term forest and related terms such as afforestation,
reforestation and deforestation in the context of reporting and
accounting Article 3.3 and 3.4 activities under the Kyoto Protocol, see
Revised Supplementary Methods and Good Practice Guidance
Arising from the Kyoto Protocol.] See also Reducing Emissions from
Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+).
Deliberative governance See Governance.
Demand and supply-side measures
Demand-side measures
Policies and programmes for influencing the demand for goods and/
or services. In the energy sector, demand-side management aims
at reducing the demand for electricity and other forms of energy
required to deliver energy services.
Supply-side measures
Policies and programmes for influencing how a certain demand for
goods and/or services is met. In the energy sector, for example, supplyside
mitigation measures aim at reducing the amount of greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions emitted per unit of energy produced.
See also Mitigation measures.
Demand-side measures See Demand and supply-side measures.
Desertification Land degradation in arid, semi-arid, and dry subhumid
areas resulting from many factors, including climatic variations
and human activities (UNCCD, 1994).
Detection See Detection and attribution.
Detection and attribution Detection of change is defined
as the process of demonstrating that climate or a system affected
by climate has changed in some defined statistical sense, without
providing a reason for that change. An identified change is detected
in observations if its likelihood of occurrence by chance due to
internal variability alone is determined to be small, for example,
<10%. Attribution is defined as the process of evaluating the relative
contributions of multiple causal factors to a change or event with
a formal assessment of confidence.
Development pathways See Pathways.
Diet ‘The kinds of food that follow a particular pattern that
a person or community eats’ (FAO, 2014). See also Dietary patterns.
Dietary patterns The quantities, proportions, variety or
combinations of different foods and beverages in diets, and the
frequency with which they are habitually consumed (Dietary
Guidelines Advisory Committee, 2015). See also Diet.
Dietary and nutrition transitions Modernisation,
urbanisation, economic development, and increased wealth lead to
predictable shifts in diet, referred to as ‘nutrition transitions’ (Misra
and Khurana, 2008; Popkin, 2006). Over historical time there have
been a number of dietary transitions but in recent decades the
prime transition has been associated with changes from subsistence
towards eating diets rich in calories and relatively poor in nutrition
(the ‘westernised diet’) that are obesogenic. From a public health
perspective, a new dietary transition is in focus, from the obesogenic
diet to one promoting health.
Disaster A ‘serious disruption of the functioning of a community
or a society at any scale due to hazardous events interacting with
conditions of exposure, vulnerability and capacity, leading to one or
more of the following: human, material, economic and environmental
losses and impacts’ (UNISDR, 2017). See also Exposure, Risk,
Vulnerability and Hazard.
Disaster risk management (DRM) Processes for designing,
implementing, and evaluating strategies, policies, and measures
to improve the understanding of current and future disaster risk,
foster disaster risk reduction and transfer, and promote continuous
improvement in disaster preparedness, prevention and protection,
response, and recovery practices, with the explicit purpose of
increasing human security, well-being, quality of life, and sustainable
development (UNISDR, 2017).
Discounting A mathematical operation that aims to make
monetary (or other) amounts received or expended at different
times (years) comparable across time. The discounter uses a fixed
or possibly time-varying discount rate from year to year that makes
future value worth less today (if the discount rate is positive). The
choice of discount rate(s) is debated as it is a judgement based on
hidden and/or explicit values.
Discount rate See Discounting.
(Internal) Displacement The forced movement of people
within the country they live in. Internally displaced persons (IDPs) are
‘Persons or groups of persons who have been forced or obliged to flee
or to leave their homes or places of habitual residence, in particular as
a result of or in order to avoid the effects of armed conflict, situations
of generalized violence, violations of human rights or natural or
human-made disasters, and who have not crossed an internationally
recognized State border’ (UN, 1998). See also Migration.
Displacement In land system science, displacement denotes the
increasing spatial separation between the location of agricultural
and forestry production and the place of consumption of these
products, as it occurs with trade. Displacement disconnects spatially
environmental impacts from their socioeconomic drivers.
Downscaling Method that derives local- to regional-scale (up to
km) information from larger-scale models or data analyses. Two
main methods exist: dynamical downscaling and empirical/statistical
downscaling. The dynamical method uses the output of regional
climate models, global models with variable spatial resolution, or
high-resolution global models. The empirical/statistical methods [are
based on observations and] develop statistical relationships that link
the large-scale atmospheric variables with local/ regional climate
variables. In all cases, the quality of the driving model remains an
important limitation on quality of the downscaled information. The
two methods can be combined, e.g., applying empirical/statistical
downscaling to the output of a regional climate model, consisting of
a dynamical downscaling of a global climate model.
Drainage ‘Artificial lowering of the soil water table’ (IPCC, 2013).
See also Rewetting.

Glossary Annex I
AI
Drought A period of abnormally dry weather long enough
to cause a serious hydrological imbalance. Drought is a relative
term, therefore any discussion in terms of precipitation deficit
must refer to the particular precipitation-related activity that is
under discussion. For example, shortage of precipitation during the
growing season impinges on crop production or ecosystem function
in general (due to soil moisture drought, also termed agricultural
drought), and during the runoff and percolation season primarily
affects water supplies (hydrological drought). Storage changes in
soil moisture and groundwater are also affected by increases in
actual evapotranspiration in addition to reductions in precipitation.
A period with an abnormal precipitation deficit is defined as
a meteorological drought.
Megadrought
A very lengthy and pervasive drought, lasting much longer than
normal, usually a decade or more.
Early warning systems (EWS) The set of technical, financial
and institutional capacities needed to generate and disseminate
timely and meaningful warning information to enable individuals,
communities and organisations threatened by a hazard to prepare
to act promptly and appropriately to reduce the possibility of harm
or loss. Dependent upon context, EWS may draw upon scientific and/
or Indigenous knowledge. EWS are also considered for ecological
applications e.g., conservation, where the organisation itself is not
threatened by hazard but the ecosystem under conservation is
(an example is coral bleaching alerts), in agriculture (for example,
warnings of ground frost, hailstorms) and in fisheries (storm and
tsunami warnings) (UNISDR, 2009; IPCC, 2012a).
Earth system feedbacks See Climate feedback.
Earth system model (ESM) A coupled atmosphere–ocean
general circulation model in which a representation of the carbon
cycle is included, allowing for interactive calculation of atmospheric
carbon dioxide (CO2) or compatible emissions. Additional components
(e.g., atmospheric chemistry, ice sheets, dynamic vegetation, nitrogen
cycle, but also urban or crop models) may be included. See also
Climate model.
Ecological cascade A series of secondary extinctions as a result
of the extinction of a key species within an ecosystem (Soulé, 2010).
Ecosystem A functional unit consisting of living organisms, their
non-living environment and the interactions within and between
them. The components included in a given ecosystem and its spatial
boundaries depend on the purpose for which the ecosystem is
defined: in some cases they are relatively sharp, while in others they
are diffuse. Ecosystem boundaries can change over time. Ecosystems
are nested within other ecosystems and their scale can range from
very small to the entire biosphere. In the current era, most ecosystems
either contain people as key organisms, or are influenced by the effects
of human activities in their environment. See also Ecosystem services.
Ecosystem services Ecological processes or functions having
monetary or non-monetary value to individuals or society at large.
These are frequently classified as (1) supporting services such as
productivity or biodiversity maintenance, (2) provisioning services
such as food or fibre, (3) regulating services such as climate regulation
or carbon sequestration, and (4) cultural services such as tourism or
spiritual and aesthetic appreciation. See also Ecosystem.
Effective climate sensitivity See Climate sensitivity.
Effective radiative forcing See Radiative forcing.
El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) The term El Niño was
initially used to describe a warm-water current that periodically flows
along the coast of Ecuador and Peru, disrupting the local fishery. It has
since become identified with warming of the tropical Pacific Ocean
east of the dateline. This oceanic event is associated with a fluctuation
of a global-scale tropical and subtropical surface pressure pattern
called the Southern Oscillation. This coupled atmosphere–ocean
phenomenon, with preferred time scales of two to about seven
years, is known as the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO). It is often
measured by the surface pressure anomaly difference between Tahiti
and Darwin and/or the sea surface temperatures in the central and
eastern equatorial Pacific. During an ENSO event, the prevailing trade
winds weaken, reducing upwelling and altering ocean currents such
that the sea surface temperatures warm, further weakening the trade
winds. This phenomenon has a great impact on the wind, sea surface
temperature and precipitation patterns in the tropical Pacific. It has
climatic effects throughout the Pacific region and in many other parts
of the world, through global teleconnections. The cold phase of ENSO
is called La Niña.
Embodied (embedded) [emissions, water, land] The total
emissions [water use, land use] generated [used] in the production
of goods and services regardless of the location and timing of those
emissions [water use, land use] in the production process. This
includes emissions [water use, land use] within the country used
to produce goods or services for the country’s own use, but also
includes the emissions [water use, land use] related to the production
of such goods or services in other countries that are then consumed
in another country through imports. Such emissions [water, land]
are termed ‘embodied’ or ‘embedded’ emissions, or in some cases
(particularly with water) as ‘virtual water use’ (David and Caldeira,
; Allan, 2005; MacDonald et al., 2015).
Emission scenario A plausible representation of the future
development of emissions of substances that are radiatively active
(e.g., greenhouse gases (GHGs), aerosols) based on a coherent and
internally consistent set of assumptions about driving forces (such as
demographic and socio-economic development, technological change,
energy and land use) and their key relationships. Concentration
scenarios, derived from emission scenarios, are often used as
input to a climate model to compute climate projections. See also
Baseline scenario, Mitigation scenario, Representative Concentration
Pathways (RCPs) (under Pathways), Shared socio-economic pathways
(SSPs) (under Pathways), Scenario, Socio-economic scenario, and
Transformation pathway.
Emission trajectories A projected development in time of the
emission of a greenhouse gas (GHG) or group of GHGs, aerosols, and
GHG precursors. See also Pathways.
Energy access Access to clean, reliable and affordable energy
services for cooking and heating, lighting, communications, and
productive uses (with special reference to Sustainable Development
Goal 7) (AGECC, 2010). See also Traditional biomass.


Enabling conditions (for adaptation and mitigation
options) Conditions that affect the feasibility of adaptation
and mitigation options, and can accelerate and scale-up systemic
transitions that would limit temperature increase and enhance
capacities of systems and societies to adapt to the associated climate
change, while achieving sustainable development, eradicating
poverty and reducing inequalities. Enabling conditions include
finance, technological innovation, strengthening policy instruments,
institutional capacity, multi-level governance, and changes in human
behaviour and lifestyles. They also include inclusive processes,
attention to power asymmetries and unequal opportunities for
development and reconsideration of values.
Energy efficiency The ratio of output or useful energy or energy
services or other useful physical outputs obtained from a system,
conversion process, transmission or storage activity to the input
of energy (measured as kWh kWh–1, tonnes kWh–1 or any other
physical measure of useful output like tonne-km transported). Energy
efficiency is often described by energy intensity. In economics,
energy intensity describes the ratio of economic output to energy
input. Most commonly energy efficiency is measured as input energy
over a physical or economic unit, i.e. kWh USD–1 (energy intensity),
kWh tonne–1. For buildings, it is often measured as kWh m–2, and
for vehicles as km liter–1or liter km–1. Very often in policy ‘energy
efficiency’ is intended as the measures to reduce energy demand
through technological options such as insulating buildings, more
efficient appliances, efficient lighting, efficient vehicles, etc.
Energy security The goal of a given country, or the global
community as a whole, to maintain an adequate, stable and
predictable energy supply. Measures encompass safeguarding the
sufficiency of energy resources to meet national energy demand at
competitive and stable prices and the resilience of the energy supply;
enabling development and deployment of technologies; building
sufficient infrastructure to generate, store and transmit energy
supplies and ensuring enforceable contracts of delivery.
Enhanced weathering Enhancing the removal of carbon
dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere through dissolution of silicate
and carbonate rocks by grinding these minerals to small particles
and actively applying them to soils, coasts or oceans.
(Model) Ensemble A group of parallel model simulations
characterising historical climate conditions, climate predictions, or
climate projections. Variation of the results across the ensemble
members may give an estimate of modelling-based uncertainty.
Ensembles made with the same model but different initial conditions
only characterise the uncertainty associated with internal climate
variability, whereas multi-model ensembles including simulations
by several models also include the impact of model differences.
Perturbed parameter ensembles, in which model parameters are
varied in a systematic manner, aim to assess the uncertainty resulting
from internal model specifications within a single model. Remaining
sources of uncertainty unaddressed with model ensembles are
related to systematic model errors or biases, which may be assessed
from systematic comparisons of model simulations with observations
wherever available. See also Climate projection.
Equality A principle that ascribes equal worth to all human beings,
including equal opportunities, rights, and obligations, irrespective
of origins.
Inequality
Uneven opportunities and social positions, and processes of
discrimination within a group or society, based on gender,
class, ethnicity, age, and (dis)ability, often produced by uneven
development. Income inequality refers to gaps between highest and
lowest income earners within a country and between countries. See
also Equity and Fairness.
Equilibrium climate sensitivity See Climate sensitivity.
Equity The principle of being fair and impartial, and a basis for
understanding how the impacts and responses to climate change,
including costs and benefits, are distributed in and by society in more
or less equal ways. It is often aligned with ideas of equality, fairness
and justice and applied with respect to equity in the responsibility
for, and distribution of, climate impacts and policies across society,
generations, and gender, and in the sense of who participates and
controls the processes of decision making.
Distributive equity
Equity in the consequences, outcomes, costs and benefits of actions
or policies. In the case of climate change or climate policies for
different people, places and countries, including equity aspects of
sharing burdens and benefits for mitigation and adaptation.
Gender equity
Equity between women and men with regard to their rights,
resources and opportunities. In the case of climate change, gender
equity recognises that women are often more vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change and may be disadvantaged in the process
and outcomes of climate policy.
Inter-generational equity
Equity between generations. In the context of climate change, intergenerational
equity acknowledges that the effects of past and present
emissions, vulnerabilities and policies impose costs and benefits for
people in the future and of different age groups.
Procedural equity
Equity in the process of decision making including recognition and
inclusiveness in participation, equal representation, bargaining
power, voice and equitable access to knowledge and resources
to participate.
See also Equality and Fairness.
Evaporation The physical process by which a liquid (e.g., water)
becomes a gas (e.g., water vapour).
Evapotranspiration The combined processes through which
water is transferred to the atmosphere from open water and ice
surfaces, bare soil, and vegetation that make up the Earth’s surface.
Potential Evapotranspiration
The potential rate of water loss without any limits imposed by the
water supply. See also Evaporation.
Evidence Data and information used in the scientific process to
establish findings. In this report, the degree of evidence reflects the
amount, quality, and consistency of scientific/technical information

Glossary Annex I
AI
on which the Lead Authors base their findings. See also Agreement,
Confidence, Likelihood, and Uncertainty.
Exposure The presence of people; livelihoods; species or
ecosystems; environmental functions, services, and resources;
infrastructure; or economic, social, or cultural assets in places and
settings that could be adversely affected. See also Hazard, Risk,
and Vulnerability.
Extratropical Cyclone Any cyclonic-scale storm that is not
a tropical cyclone. Usually refers to a middle- or high-latitude
migratory storm system formed in regions of large horizontal
temperature variations. Sometimes called extratropical storm or
extratropical low. See also Tropical cyclone.
Extreme weather or climate event See Climate extreme
(extreme weather or climate event).
Extreme weather event An event that is rare at a particular
place and time of year. Definitions of ‘rare’ vary, but an extreme
weather event would normally be as rare as or rarer than the 10th
or 90th percentile of a probability density function estimated from
observations. By definition, the characteristics of what is called
extreme weather may vary from place to place in an absolute sense.
When a pattern of extreme weather persists for some time, such as
a season, it may be classed as an extreme climate event, especially
if it yields an average or total that is itself extreme (e.g., drought
or heavy rainfall over a season). See also Heat wave, and Climate
extreme (extreme weather or climate event).
Fairness Impartial and just treatment without favouritism or
discrimination in which each person is considered of equal worth
with equal opportunity. See also Equity, and Equality.
Feasibility The degree to which climate goals and response
options are considered possible and/or desirable. Feasibility
depends on geophysical, ecological, technological, economic, social
and institutional conditions for change. Conditions underpinning
feasibility are dynamic, spatially variable, and may vary between
different groups. See also Enabling conditions.
Feedback See Climate feedback.
Flexible governance See Governance.
Flood The overflowing of the normal confines of a stream or other
body of water, or the accumulation of water over areas that are not
normally submerged. Floods include river (fluvial) floods, flash floods,
urban floods, rain (pluvial) floods, sewer floods, coastal floods, and
glacial lake outburst floods.
Flux A movement (a flow) of matter (e.g., water vapor, particles),
heat or energy from one place to another, or from one medium (e.g.,
land surface) to another (e.g., atmosphere).
Food loss and waste ‘The decrease in quantity or quality
of food’. Food waste is part of food loss and refers to discarding
or alternative (non-food) use of food that is safe and nutritious
for human consumption along the entire food supply chain, from
primary production to end household consumer level. Food waste is
recognised as a distinct part of food loss because the drivers that
generate it and the solutions to it are different from those of food
losses (FAO, 2015b).
Food security A situation that exists when all people, at all times,
have physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe and
nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and food preferences
for an active and healthy life (FAO, 2001). [Note: Whilst the term
‘food security’ explicitly includes nutrition within it ‘dietary needs …
for an active and healthy life’, in the past the term has sometimes
privileged the supply of calories (energy), especially to the hungry.
Thus, the term ‘food and nutrition security’ is often used (with the
same definition as food security) to emphasise that the term food
covers both energy and nutrition (FAO, 2009).]
Food system All the elements (environment, people, inputs,
processes, infrastructures, institutions, etc.) and activities that
relate to the production, processing, distribution, preparation and
consumption of food, and the output of these activities, including
socio-economic and environmental outcomes (HLPE, 2017). [Note:
Whilst there is a global food system (encompassing the totality of
global production and consumption), each location’s food system is
unique, being defined by that place’s mix of food produced locally,
nationally, regionally or globally.]
Forcing See Radiative forcing.
Forest A vegetation type dominated by trees. Many definitions
of the term forest are in use throughout the world, reflecting
wide differences in biogeophysical conditions, social structure and
economics. [Note: For a discussion of the term forest in the context of
National GHG inventories, see the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National
GHG Inventories and information provided by the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 2019).] See
also Afforestation, Deforestation, and Reforestation.
Fossil fuels Carbon-based fuels from fossil hydrocarbon deposits,
including coal, oil, and natural gas.
Framework Convention on Climate Change See United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
Gender equity See Equity.
Glacier A perennial mass of ice, and possibly firn and snow,
originating on the land surface by the recrystallisation of snow and
showing evidence of past or present flow. A glacier typically gains
mass by accumulation of snow, and loses mass by melting and ice
discharge into the sea or a lake if the glacier terminates in a body of
water. Land ice masses of continental size (>50 000 km2) are referred
to as ice sheets.
Global climate model (also referred to as general circulation
model, both abbreviated as GCM) See Climate model.
Global mean surface temperature (GMST) Estimated
global average of near-surface air temperatures over land and
sea-ice, and sea surface temperatures over ice-free ocean regions,
with changes normally expressed as departures from a value over a
specified reference period. When estimating changes in GMST, nearsurface
air temperature over both land and oceans are also used. See
also Global mean surface air temperature (GSAT), Land surface air
temperature, and Sea surface temperature (SST).


Global mean surface air temperature (GSAT) Global average
of near-surface air temperatures over land and oceans. Changes
in GSAT are often used as a measure of global temperature change in
climate models but are not observed directly. See also Global mean
surface temperature (GMST), and Land surface air temperature.
Global warming An increase in global mean surface temperature
(GMST) averaged over a 30-year period, or the 30-year period centred
on a particular year or decade, expressed relative to pre-industrial
levels unless otherwise specified. For 30-year periods that span past
and future years, the current multi-decadal warming trend is assumed
to continue. See also Climate change, and Climate variability.
Governance A comprehensive and inclusive concept of the full
range of means for deciding, managing, implementing and monitoring
policies and measures. Whereas government is defined strictly in
terms of the nation-state, the more inclusive concept of governance
recognises the contributions of various levels of government (global,
international, regional, sub-national and local) and the contributing
roles of the private sector, of nongovernmental actors, and of civil
society to addressing the many types of issues facing the global
community, and the local context where the effectiveness of policies
and measures are determined.
Adaptive governance
An emerging term in the literature for the evolution of formal
and informal institutions of governance that prioritise planning,
implementation and evaluation of policy through iterative social
learning; in the context of climate change, governance facilitating
social learning to steer the use and protection of natural resources,
and ecosystem services, particularly in situations of complexity
and uncertainty.
Climate governance
Purposeful mechanisms and measures aimed at steering social
systems towards preventing, mitigating, or adapting to the risks
posed by climate change (Jagers and Stripple, 2003).
Deliberative governance
Involves decision making through inclusive public conversation
which allows opportunity for developing policy options through
public discussion rather than collating individual preferences through
voting or referenda (although the latter governance mechanisms can
also be proceeded and legitimated by public deliberation processes).
Flexible governance
Strategies of governance at various levels, which prioritise the use
of social learning and rapid feedback mechanisms in planning and
policy making, often through incremental, experimental and iterative
management processes.
Governance capacity
The ability of governance institutions, leaders, and non-state and
civil society to plan, co-ordinate, fund, implement, evaluate and
adjust policies and measures over the short, medium and long term,
adjusting for uncertainty, rapid change and wide ranging impacts
and multiple actors and demands.
Multi-level governance
Negotiated, non-hierarchical exchanges between institutions at the
transnational, national, regional and local levels.
Participatory governance
A governance system that enables direct public engagement in
decision-making using a variety of techniques for example, referenda,
community deliberation, citizen juries or participatory budgeting. The
approach can be applied in formal and informal institutional contexts
from national to local, but is usually associated with devolved
decision making (Fung and Wright, 2003; Sarmiento and Tilly, 2018).
Governance capacity See Governance.
Grazing land The sum of rangelands and pastures not considered
as cropland, and subject to livestock grazing or hay production. It
includes a wide range of ecosystems, e.g. systems with vegetation
that fall below the threshold used in the forest land category,
silvo-pastoral systems, as well as natural, managed grasslands
and semideserts.
Green infrastructure The interconnected set of natural and
constructed ecological systems, green spaces and other landscape
features. It includes planted and indigenous trees, wetlands, parks,
green open spaces and original grassland and woodlands, as well
as possible building and street level design interventions that
incorporate vegetation. Green infrastructure provides services and
functions in the same way as conventional infrastructure (Culwick
and Bobbins, 2016).
Greenhouse gas (GHG) Gaseous constituents of the atmosphere,
both natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation at
specific wavelengths within the spectrum of terrestrial radiation
emitted by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere itself, and by clouds.
This property causes the greenhouse effect. Water vapour (H2O),
carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4) and ozone
(O3) are the primary GHGs in the Earth’s atmosphere. Moreover, there
are a number of entirely human-made GHGs in the atmosphere,
such as the halocarbons and other chlorine- and bromine-containing
substances, dealt with under the Montreal Protocol. Beside CO2, N2O
and CH4, the Kyoto Protocol deals with the GHGs sulphur hexafluoride
(SF6), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and perfluorocarbons (PFCs).
Greenhouse gas removal (GGR) Withdrawal of a greenhouse
gas (GHG) and/or a precursor from the atmosphere by a sink. See also
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR), and Negative emissions.
Gross domestic product (GDP) The sum of gross value added,
at purchasers’ prices, by all resident and non-resident producers in
the economy, plus any taxes and minus any subsidies not included
in the value of the products in a country or a geographic region for a
given period, normally one year. GDP is calculated without deducting
for depreciation of fabricated assets or depletion and degradation of
natural resources.
Halocarbons A collective term for the group of partially
halogenated organic species, which includes the chlorofluorocarbons
(CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), hydrofluorocarbons
(HFCs), halons, methyl chloride and methyl bromide. Many of the
halocarbons have large Global Warming Potentials. The chlorine and
bromine-containing halocarbons are also involved in the depletion of
the ozone layer.
Hazard The potential occurrence of a natural or human-induced
physical event or trend that may cause loss of life, injury, or other

Glossary Annex I
AI
health impacts, as well as damage and loss to property, infrastructure,
livelihoods, service provision, ecosystems and environmental
resources. See also Disaster, Exposure, Risk, and Vulnerability.
Heatwave A period of abnormally hot weather. Heatwaves and
warm spells have various and in some cases overlapping definitions.
See also Extreme weather event.
Holocene The current interglacial geological epoch, the second of
two epochs within the Quaternary period, the preceding being the
Pleistocene. The International Commission on Stratigraphy defines
the start of the Holocene at 11,700 years before 2000 (ICS, 2019).See
also Anthropocene.
Human behaviour The way in which a person acts in response
to a particular situation or stimulus. Human actions are relevant
at different levels, from international, national, and sub-national
actors, to NGO, firm-level actors, and communities, households, and
individual actions.
Adaptation behaviour
Human actions that directly or indirectly affect the risks of climate
change impacts.
Mitigation behaviour
Human actions that directly or indirectly influence mitigation.
Human behavioural change A transformation or modification
of human actions. Behaviour change efforts can be planned in ways
that mitigate climate change and/or reduce negative consequences
of climate change impacts.
Human rights Rights that are inherent to all human beings,
universal, inalienable, and indivisible, typically expressed and
guaranteed by law. They include the right to life, economic, social, and
cultural rights, and the right to development and self-determination
(based upon the definition by the UN Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights).
Procedural rights
Rights to a legal procedure to enforce substantive rights.
Substantive rights
Basic human rights, including the right to the substance of being
human such as life itself, liberty and happiness.
Human security A condition that is met when the vital core of
human lives is protected, and when people have the freedom and
capacity to live with dignity. In the context of climate change, the
vital core of human lives includes the universal and culturally specific,
material and non-material elements necessary for people to act on
behalf of their interests and to live with dignity.
Human system Any system in which human organisations
and institutions play a major role. Often, but not always, the term
is synonymous with society or social system. Systems such as
agricultural systems, urban systems, political systems, technological
systems, and economic systems are all human systems in the sense
applied in this report.
Hydrological cycle The cycle in which water evaporates from the
oceans and the land surface, is carried over the Earth in atmospheric
circulation as water vapour, condenses to form clouds, precipitates
as rain or snow, which on land can be intercepted by trees and
vegetation, potentially accumulating as snow or ice, provides runoff
on the land surface, infiltrates into soils, recharges groundwater,
discharges into streams, and ultimately, flows out into the oceans
as rivers, polar glaciers and ice sheets, from which it will eventually
evaporate again. The various systems involved in the hydrological
cycle are usually referred to as hydrological systems.
Ice sheet An ice body originating on land that covers an area of
continental size, generally defined as covering >50,000 km2. An ice
sheet flows outward from a high central ice plateau with a small
average surface slope. The margins usually slope more steeply, and
most ice is discharged through fast flowing ice streams or outlet
glaciers, often into the sea or into ice shelves floating on the sea.
There are only two ice sheets in the modern world, one on Greenland
and one on Antarctica. The latter is divided into the East Antarctic Ice
Sheet (EAIS), the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) and the Antarctic
Peninsula ice sheet. During glacial periods there were other ice
sheets. See also Glacier.
Impacts (consequences, outcomes) The consequences of
realised risks on natural and human systems, where risks result
from the interactions of climate-related hazards (including extreme
weather and climate events), exposure, and vulnerability. Impacts
generally refer to effects on lives, livelihoods, health and well-being,
ecosystems and species, economic, social and cultural assets, services
(including ecosystem services), and infrastructure. Impacts may be
referred to as consequences or outcomes, and can be adverse or
beneficial. See also Adaptation, Exposure, Hazard, Loss and Damage,
and losses and damages, and Vulnerability.
(climate change) Impact assessment The practice of
identifying and evaluating, in monetary and/or non-monetary terms,
the effects of climate change on natural and human systems.
Incremental adaptation See Adaptation.
Indigenous knowledge The understandings, skills and
philosophies developed by societies with long histories of interaction
with their natural surroundings. For many Indigenous peoples,
Indigenous knowledge informs decision-making about fundamental
aspects of life, from day-to-day activities to longer term actions. This
knowledge is integral to cultural complexes, which also encompass
language, systems of classification, resource use practices, social
interactions, values, ritual and spirituality. These distinctive ways
of knowing are important facets of the world’s cultural diversity.
(UNESCO, 2018). See also Local knowledge.
Indirect land-use change See Land-use change.
Industrial revolution A period of rapid industrial growth with
far-reaching social and economic consequences, beginning in Britain
during the second half of the 18th century and spreading to Europe
and later to other countries including the United States. The invention
of the steam engine was an important trigger of this development.
The industrial revolution marks the beginning of a strong increase
in the use of fossil fuels, initially coal, and hence emission of carbon
dioxide (CO2). See also Pre-industrial.
Industrialised/developed/developing countries There are
a diversity of approaches for categorising countries on the basis of
their level of economic development, and for defining terms such


as industrialised, developed, or developing. Several categorisations
are used in this report. (1) In the United Nations system, there is no
established convention for designating of developed and developing
countries or areas. (2) The United Nations Statistics Division specifies
developed and developing regions based on common practice.
In addition, specific countries are designated as Least Developed
Countries (LDC), landlocked developing countries, small island
developing states (SIDS), and transition economies. Many countries
appear in more than one of these categories. (3) The World Bank
uses income as the main criterion for classifying countries as
low, lower middle, upper middle, and high income. (4) The United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) aggregates indicators for
life expectancy, educational attainment, and income into a single
composite Human Development Index (HDI) to classify countries as
low, medium, high, or very high human development.
Inequality See Equality.
Institution Rules, norms and conventions held in common by
social actors that guide, constrain and shape human interaction.
Institutions can be formal, such as laws and policies, or informal,
such as norms and conventions. Organisations - such as parliaments,
regulatory agencies, private firms, and community bodies - develop
and act in response to institutional frameworks and the incentives
they frame. Institutions can guide, constrain and shape human
interaction through direct control, through incentives, and through
processes of socialisation. See also Institutional capacity.
Institutional capacity Building and strengthening individual
organisations and providing technical and management training to
support integrated planning and decision-making processes between
organisations and people, as well as empowerment, social capital,
and an enabling environment, including the culture, values and
power relations (Willems and Baumert, 2003).
Integrated assessment A method of analysis that combines
results and models from the physical, biological, economic and
social sciences and the interactions among these components in
a consistent framework to evaluate the status and the consequences
of environmental change and the policy responses to it. See also
Integrated assessment model (IAM).
Integrated assessment model (IAM) Models that integrate
knowledge from two or more domains into a single framework. They
are one of the main tools for undertaking integrated assessments.
One class of IAM used in respect of climate change mitigation may
include representations of: multiple sectors of the economy, such as
energy, land use and land use change; interactions between sectors;
the economy as a whole; associated greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
and sinks; and reduced representations of the climate system. This
class of model is used to assess linkages between economic, social
and technological development and the evolution of the climate
system. Another class of IAM additionally includes representations of
the costs associated with climate change impacts, but includes less
detailed representations of economic systems. These can be used to
assess impacts and mitigation in a cost-benefit framework and have
been used to estimate the social cost of carbon.
Integrated response options In this report, integrated
response options are those options that simultaneously address
more than one land challenge. These can be categorised into options
that rely on a) land management, b) value chain management, and
c) risk management. Integrated response options are not mutually
exclusive. See also Land challenge.
Integrated water resources management (IWRM) A process
which promotes the coordinated development and management of
water, land and related resources in order to maximise economic and
social welfare in an equitable manner without compromising the
sustainability of vital ecosystems.
Inter-generational equity See Equity.
Internal variability See Climate variability.
Irreversibility A perturbed state of a dynamical system is defined
as irreversible on a given timescale if the recovery timescale from
this state due to natural processes is substantially longer than the
time it takes for the system to reach this perturbed state. See also
Tipping point.
Kyoto Protocol The Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is an
international treaty adopted in December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan, at
the Third Session of the Conference of the Parties (COP3) to the
UNFCCC. It contains legally binding commitments, in addition to
those included in the UNFCCC. Countries included in Annex B of the
Protocol (mostly OECD countries and countries with economies in
transition) agreed to reduce their anthropogenic greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions (carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous
oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs),
and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) by at least 5% below 1990 levels
in the first commitment period (2008–2012). The Kyoto Protocol
entered into force on 16 February 2005 and as of May 2018 had 192
Parties (191 States and the European Union). A second commitment
period was agreed in December 2012 at COP18, known as the Doha
Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in which a new set of Parties
committed to reduce GHG emissions by at least 18% below 1990
levels in the period from 2013 to 2020. However, as of May 2018, the
Doha Amendment had not received sufficient ratifications to enter
into force. See also Paris Agreement.
Land The terrestrial portion of the biosphere that comprises the
natural resources (soil, near surface air, vegetation and other biota,
and water), the ecological processes, topography, and human
settlements and infrastructure that operate within that system (FAO,
; UNCCD, 1994).
Land challenges In this report, land challenges refers to landbased
mitigation and adaptation, desertification, land degradation
and food security.
Land cover The biophysical coverage of land (e.g., bare soil,
rocks, forests, buildings and roads or lakes). Land cover is often
categorised in broad land-cover classes (e.g., deciduous forest,
coniferous forest, mixed forest, grassland, bare ground). [Note: In
some literature assessed in this report, land cover and land use are
used interchangeably, but the two represent distinct classification
systems. For example, the land cover class woodland can be under
various land uses such as livestock grazing, recreation, conservation,
or wood harvest.] See also Land cover change, and Land-use change.

Glossary Annex I
AI
Land cover change Change from one land cover class to another,
due to change in land use or change in natural conditions (Pongratz et
al., 2018). See also Land-use change, and Land management change.
Land degradation A negative trend in land condition, caused by
direct or indirect human-induced processes including anthropogenic
climate change, expressed as long-term reduction or loss of at least
one of the following: biological productivity, ecological integrity or
value to humans. [Note: This definition applies to forest and nonforest
land. Changes in land condition resulting solely from natural
processes (such as volcanic eruptions) are not considered to be
land degradation. Reduction of biological productivity or ecological
integrity or value to humans can constitute degradation, but any one
of these changes need not necessarily be considered degradation.]
Land degradation neutrality A state whereby the amount
and quality of land resources necessary to support ecosystem
functions and services and enhance food security remain stable or
increase within specified temporal and spatial scales and ecosystems
(UNCCD, 2019).
Land management Sum of land-use practices (e.g., sowing,
fertilizing, weeding, harvesting, thinning, clear-cutting) that take
place within broader land-use categories. (Pongratz et al., 2018)
Land management change
A change in land management that occurs within a land-use category.
See also Land-use change.
Land potential The inherent, long-term potential of the land to
sustainably generate ecosystem services, which reflects the capacity
and resilience of the land-based natural capital, in the face of ongoing
environmental change (UNEP, 2016).
Land rehabilitation Direct or indirect actions undertaken with
the aim of reinstating a level of ecosystem functionality, where
the goal is provision of goods and services rather than ecological
restoration (McDonald, et al., 2016).
Land restoration The process of assisting the recovery of land
from a degraded state (McDonald et al., 2016; IPBES, 2018).
Land surface air temperature (LSAT) The near-surface air
temperature over land, typically measured at 1.25–2 m above the
ground using standard meteorological equipment.
Land use The total of arrangements, activities and inputs applied
to a parcel of land. The term land use is also used in the sense of
the social and economic purposes for which land is managed
(e.g., grazing, timber extraction, conservation and city dwelling).
In national GHG inventories, land use is classified according to
the IPCC land use categories of forest land, cropland, grassland,
wetlands, settlements, other lands (see the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for
National GHG Inventories for details). See also Land-use change and
Land management.
Land-use change (LUC) The change from one land use category
to another. [Note: In some of the scientific literature assessed in this
report, land-use change encompasses changes in land-use categories
as well as changes in land management.]
Indirect land-use change (iLUC)
Land use change outside the area of focus, that occurs as
a consequence of change in use or management of land within the
area of focus, such as through market or policy drivers. For example,
if agricultural land is diverted to biofuel production, forest clearance
may occur elsewhere to replace the former agricultural production.
See also Afforestation, Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use
(AFOLU), Deforestation, Land use, land-use change and forestry
(LULUCF), Reforestation, the IPCC Special Report on Land Use, Land-
Use Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000), and the 2006 IPCC Guidelines
for National GHG Inventories (IPCC, 2006).
Land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) In the
context of national greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC,
), LULUCF is a GHG inventory sector that covers anthropogenic
emissions and removals of GHG in managed lands, excluding non-
CO2 agricultural emissions. Following the 2006 IPCC Guidelines
for National GHG Inventories, ‘anthropogenic’ land-related GHG
fluxes are defined as all those occurring on ‘managed land’, i.e.,
‘where human interventions and practices have been applied to
perform production, ecological or social functions’. Since managed
land may include carbon dioxide (CO2) removals not considered
as ‘anthropogenic’ in some of the scientific literature assessed in
this report (e.g., removals associated with CO2 fertilisation and
N deposition), the land-related net GHG emission estimates from
global models included in this report are not necessarily directly
comparable with LULUCF estimates in National GHG Inventories. See
also Land-use change (LUC).
Latent heat flux The turbulent flux of heat from the Earth’s
surface to the atmosphere that is associated with evaporation or
condensation of water vapour at the surface; a component of the
surface energy budget. See also Atmosphere, and Flux.
Leakage The effects of policies that result in a displacement of the
environmental impact, thereby counteracting the intended effects of
the initial policies.
Lifecycle assessment (LCA) Compilation and evaluation of the
inputs, outputs and the potential environmental impacts of a product
or service throughout its life cycle (ISO, 2018).
Likelihood The chance of a specific outcome occurring, where this
might be estimated probabilistically. Likelihood is expressed in this
report using a standard terminology (Mastrandrea et al., 2010). See
also Agreement, Evidence, Confidence, and Uncertainty.
Livelihood The resources used and the activities undertaken in
order to live. Livelihoods are usually determined by the entitlements
and assets to which people have access. Such assets can be
categorised as human, social, natural, physical, or financial.
Local knowledge The understandings and skills developed
by individuals and populations, specific to the places where they
live. Local knowledge informs decision-making about fundamental
aspects of life, from day-to-day activities to longer term actions.
This knowledge is a key element of the social and cultural systems
which influence observations of, and responses to climate change;
it also informs governance decisions (UNESCO, 2018). See also
Indigenous knowledge.


Lock-in A situation in which the future development of a system,
including infrastructure, technologies, investments, institutions, and
behavioural norms, is determined or constrained (‘locked in’) by
historic developments.
Long-lived climate forcers (LLCF) A set of well-mixed
greenhouse gases with long atmospheric lifetimes. This set of
compounds includes carbon dioxide (CO2) and nitrous oxide (N2O),
together with some fluorinated gases. They have a warming effect on
climate. These compounds accumulate in the atmosphere at decadal
to centennial timescales, and their effect on climate hence persists
for decades to centuries after their emission. On timescales of
decades to a century already emitted emissions of long-lived climate
forcers can only be abated by greenhouse gas removal (GGR). See
also Short-lived climate forcers (SLCF).
Loss and Damage, and losses and damages Research has
taken Loss and Damage (capitalised letters) to refer to political
debate under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) following the establishment of the Warsaw
Mechanism on Loss and Damage in 2013, which is to ‘address loss
and damage associated with impacts of climate change, including
extreme events and slow onset events, in developing countries that
are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.’
Lowercase letters (losses and damages) have been taken to refer
broadly to harm from (observed) impacts and (projected) risks
(Mechler et al., 2018).
Maladaptive actions (Maladaptation) Actions that may lead
to increased risk of adverse climate-related outcomes, including via
increased greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, increased vulnerability
to climate change, or diminished welfare, now or in the future.
Maladaptation is usually an unintended consequence.
Malnutrition Deficiencies, excesses, or imbalances in a person’s
intake of energy and/or nutrients. The term malnutrition addresses
three broad groups of conditions: undernutrition, which includes
wasting (low weight-for-height), stunting (low height-for-age)
and underweight (low weight-for-age); micronutrient-related
malnutrition, which includes micronutrient deficiencies (a lack of
important vitamins and minerals) or micronutrient excess; and
overweight, obesity and diet-related noncommunicable diseases
(such as heart disease, stroke, diabetes and some cancers) (WHO,
). Micronutrient deficiencies are sometimes termed ‘hidden
hunger’ to emphasise that people can be malnourished in the sense
of deficient without being deficient in calories. Hidden hunger can
apply even where people are obese.
Managed forest Forests subject to human interventions (notably
silvicultural management such as planting, pruning, thinning), timber
and fuelwood harvest, protection (fire suppression, insect supression)
and management for amenity values or conservation, with defined
geographical boundaries (Ogle et al., 2018). [Note: For a discussion
of the term ‘forest’ in the context of National GHG inventories, see
the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories.] See also
Managed land.
Managed grassland Grasslands on which human interventions
are carried out, such as grazing domestic livestock or hay removal.
Managed land In the context of national greenhouse gas (GHG)
inventories under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC), the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National
GHG Inventories (IPCC, 2006) defines managed land ‘where human
interventions and practices have been applied to perform production,
ecological or social functions’. The IPCC (2006) defines anthropogenic
GHG emissions and removals in the LULUCF sector as all those
occurring on ‘managed land’. The key rationale for this approach is
that the preponderance of anthropogenic effects occurs on managed
lands. [Note: More details can be found in 2006 IPCC Guidelines for
National GHG Inventories, Volume 4, Chapter 1.]
Market failure When private decisions are based on market
prices that do not reflect the real scarcity of goods and services but
rather reflect market distortions, they do not generate an efficient
allocation of resources but cause welfare losses. A market distortion
is any event in which a market reaches a market clearing price
that is substantially different from the price that a market would
achieve while operating under conditions of perfect competition and
state enforcement of legal contracts and the ownership of private
property. Examples of factors causing market prices to deviate from
real economic scarcity are environmental externalities, public goods,
monopoly power, information asymmetry, transaction costs, and nonrational
behaviour.
Measurement, reporting and verification (MRV)
Measurement
‘The process of data collection over time, providing basic datasets,
including associated accuracy and precision, for the range of
relevant variables. Possible data sources are field measurements,
field observations, detection through remote sensing and interviews’
(UN REDD, 2009).
Reporting
‘The process of formal reporting of assessment results to the UNFCCC,
according to predetermined formats and according to established
standards, especially the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) Guidelines and GPG (Good Practice Guidance)’ (UN REDD,
).
Verification
‘The process of formal verification of reports, for example, the
established approach to verify national communications and national
inventory reports to the UNFCCC’ (UN REDD, 2009).
Megadrought See Drought.
Methane (CH4) One of the six greenhouse gases (GHGs) to be
mitigated under the Kyoto Protocol. Methane is the major component
of natural gas and associated with all hydrocarbon fuels. Significant
anthropogenic emissions also occur as a result of animal husbandry
and paddy rice production. Methane is also produced naturally
where organic matter decays under anaerobic conditions, such as
in wetlands.
Migrant See Migration.
Migration ‘The movement of a person or a group of persons, either
across an international border, or within a State. It is a population
movement, encompassing any kind of movement of people, whatever
its length, composition and causes; it includes migration of refugees,

Glossary Annex I
AI
displaced persons, economic migrants, and persons moving for other
purposes, including family reunification’ (IOM, 2018).
Migrant
‘Any person who is moving or has moved across an international
border or within a State away from his/her habitual place of residence,
regardless of (1) the person’s legal status; (2) whether the movement
is voluntary or involuntary; (3) what the causes for the movement are;
or (4) what the length of the stay is’ (IOM, 2018).
See also (Internal) Displacement.
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) A set of eight
time-bound and measurable goals for combating poverty, hunger,
disease, illiteracy, discrimination against women and environmental
degradation. These goals were agreed at the UN Millennium Summit
in 2000 together with an action plan to reach the goals by 2015.
Mitigation (of climate change) A human intervention to
reduce emissions or enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases.
Mitigation behaviour See Human behaviour.
Mitigation measures In climate policy, mitigation measures are
technologies, processes or practices that contribute to mitigation,
for example renewable energy technologies, waste minimisation
processes, public transport commuting practices.
Mitigation option A technology or practice that reduces
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions or enhances sinks.
Mitigation pathways See Pathways.
Mitigation scenario A plausible description of the future that
describes how the (studied) system responds to the implementation
of mitigation policies and measures. See also Emission scenario,
Pathways, Socio-economic scenarios, and Stabilisation (of GHG or
CO2-equivalent concentration).
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) Mechanisms put in place
at national to local scales to respectively monitor and evaluate
efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapt to the
impacts of climate change with the aim of systematically identifying,
characterising and assessing progress over time.
Motivation (of an individual) An individual’s reason or
reasons for acting in a particular way; individuals may consider
various consequences of actions, including financial, social, affective,
and environmental consequences. Motivation can arise from factors
external or internal to the individual.
Multi-level governance See Governance.
Narratives (in the context of scenarios) Qualitative
descriptions of plausible future world evolutions, describing
the characteristics, general logic and developments underlying
a particular quantitative set of scenarios. Narratives are also referred
to in the literature as ‘storylines’. See also Scenario, Scenario storyline,
and Pathways.
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) A term used
under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) whereby a country that has joined the Paris Agreement
outlines its plans for reducing its emissions. Some countries NDCs
also address how they will adapt to climate change impacts, and
what support they need from, or will provide to, other countries to
adopt low-carbon pathways and to build climate resilience. According
to Article 4 paragraph 2 of the Paris Agreement, each Party shall
prepare, communicate and maintain successive NDCs that it intends
to achieve. In the lead up to the 21st Conference of the Parties in
Paris in 2015, countries submitted Intended Nationally Determined
Contributions (INDCs). As countries join the Paris Agreement, unless
they decide otherwise, this INDC becomes their first Nationally
Determined Contribution (NDC).
Negative emissions Removal of greenhouse gases (GHGs) from
the atmosphere by deliberate human activities, i.e., in addition to the
removal that would occur via natural carbon cycle processes. See
also Net negative emissions, Net-zero emissions, Carbon dioxide
removal (CDR), and Greenhouse gas removal (GGR).
Negative emissions technologies An activity or mechanism
that results in negative emissions.
Net negative emissions A situation of net negative emissions is
achieved when, as result of human activities, more greenhouse gases
(GHG) are removed from the atmosphere than are emitted into it.
Where multiple greenhouse gases are involved, the quantification of
negative emissions depends on the climate metric chosen to compare
emissions of different gases (such as global warming potential, global
temperature change potential, and others, as well as the chosen time
horizon). See also Negative emissions, Net-zero emissions and Netzero
CO2 emissions.
Net-zero CO2 emissions Conditions in which any remaining
anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions are balanced by
anthropogenic CO2 removals over a specified period. See also Netzero
emissions, and Net negative emissions.
Net-zero emissions Net-zero emissions are achieved when
emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs) to the atmosphere are
balanced by anthropogenic removals. Where multiple greenhouse
gases are involved, the quantification of net-zero emissions depends
on the climate metric chosen to compare emissions of different
gases (such as global warming potential, global temperature
change potential, and others, as well as the chosen time horizon).
See also Net-zero CO2 emissions, Negative emissions, and Net
negative emissions.
Nitrous oxide (N2O) One of the six greenhouse gases (GHGs)
to be mitigated under the Kyoto Protocol. The main anthropogenic
source of N2O is agriculture (soil and animal manure management),
but important contributions also come from sewage treatment,
fossil fuel combustion, and chemical industrial processes. N2O is also
produced naturally from a wide variety of biological sources in soil
and water, particularly microbial action in wet tropical forests.
Non-overshoot pathways See Pathways.
Nutrition transition A predictable change in dietary patterns
associated with a country’s economic development whereby
‘problems of under- and overnutrition often coexist, reflecting the
trends in which an increasing proportion of people consume the types
of diets associated with a number of chronic diseases’ (Popkin, 1994).


Ocean acidification (OA) A reduction in the pH of the ocean,
accompanied by other chemical changes, over an extended period,
typically decades or longer, which is caused primarily by uptake
of carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere, but can also be
caused by other chemical additions or subtractions from the ocean.
Anthropogenic ocean acidification refers to the component of pH
reduction that is caused by human activity (IPCC, 2011, p. 37). See
also Climate change.
Ocean fertilisation Deliberate increase of nutrient supply to
the near-surface ocean in order to enhance biological production
through which additional carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere
is sequestered. This can be achieved by the addition of micronutrients
or macro-nutrients. Ocean fertilisation is regulated by the
London Protocol
Overshoot See Temperature overshoot.
Overshoot pathways See Pathways.
Ozone (O3) The triatomic form of oxygen (O3). In the troposphere,
it is created both naturally and by photochemical reactions involving
gases resulting from human activities (smog). Tropospheric ozone acts
as a greenhouse gas (GHG). In the stratosphere, it is created by the
interaction between solar ultraviolet radiation and molecular oxygen
(O2). Stratospheric ozone plays a dominant role in the stratospheric
radiative balance. Its concentration is highest in the ozone layer.
Paris Agreement The Paris Agreement under the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was adopted on
December 2015 in Paris, France, at the 21st session of the Conference
of the Parties (COP) to the UNFCCC. The agreement, adopted by 196
Parties to the UNFCCC, entered into force on 4 November 2016 and
as of May 2018 had 195 Signatories and was ratified by 177 Parties.
One of the goals of the Paris Agreement is ‘Holding the increase in the
global average temperature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial
levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C
above pre-industrial levels’, recognising that this would significantly
reduce the risks and impacts of climate change. Additionally, the
Agreement aims to strengthen the ability of countries to deal with
the impacts of climate change. The Paris Agreement is intended
to become fully effective in 2020. See also Kyoto Protocol, and
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs).
Participatory governance See Governance.
Pasture Area covered with grass or other plants used or suitable
for grazing of livestock; grassland.
Pathways The temporal evolution of natural and/or human
systems towards a future state. Pathway concepts range from sets
of quantitative and qualitative scenarios or narratives of potential
futures to solution-oriented decision-making processes to achieve
desirable societal goals. Pathway approaches typically focus on
biophysical, techno-economic, and/or socio-behavioural trajectories
and involve various dynamics, goals, and actors across different scales.
.5°C pathway
A pathway of emissions of greenhouse gases and other climate
forcers that provides an approximately one-in-two to two-in-three
chance, given current knowledge of the climate response, of global
warming either remaining below 1.5°C or returning to 1.5°C by
around 2100 following an overshoot.
See also Temperature overshoot.
Adaptation pathways
A series of adaptation choices involving trade-offs between shortterm
and long-term goals and values. These are processes of
deliberation to identify solutions that are meaningful to people in
the context of their daily lives and to avoid potential maladaptation.
Development pathways
Development pathways are trajectories based on an array of social,
economic, cultural, technological, institutional, and biophysical
features that characterise the interactions between human and
natural systems and outline visions for the future, at a particular scale.
Mitigation pathways
A mitigation pathway is a temporal evolution of a set of mitigation
scenario features, such as greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and
socio-economic development.
Overshoot pathways
Pathways that exceed the stabilisation level (concentration, forcing,
or temperature) before the end of a time horizon of interest
(e.g., before 2100) and then decline towards that level by that time.
Once the target level is exceeded, removal by sinks of greenhouse
gases (GHGs) is required. See also Temperature overshoot.
Non-overshoot pathways
Pathways that stay below the stabilisation level (concentration,
forcing, or temperature) during the time horizon of interest (e.g.,
until 2100).
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs)
Scenarios that include time series of emissions and concentrations
of the full suite of greenhouse gases (GHGs) and aerosols and
chemically active gases, as well as land use/land cover (Moss et
al., 2008). The word representative signifies that each RCP provides
only one of many possible scenarios that would lead to the specific
radiative forcing characteristics. The term pathway emphasises the
fact that not only the long-term concentration levels, but also the
trajectory taken over time to reach that outcome are of interest
(Moss et al., 2010). RCPs were used to develop climate projections in
CMIP5. See also Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP), and
Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs).
• RCP2.6: One pathway where radiative forcing peaks at
approximately 3 W m–2 and then declines to be limited at
.6 W m–2 in 2100 (the corresponding Extended Concentration
Pathway, or ECP, has constant emissions after 2100).
• RCP4.5 and RCP6.0: Two intermediate stabilisation pathways in
which radiative forcing is limited at approximately 4.5 W m–2
and 6.0 W m–2 in 2100 (the corresponding ECPs have constant
concentrations after 2150).
• RCP8.5: One high pathway which leads to >8.5 W m–2 in 2100
(the corresponding ECP has constant emissions after 2100 until
and constant concentrations after 2250).
Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs)
Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs) were developed to
complement the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) with
varying socio-economic challenges to adaptation and mitigation

Glossary Annex I
AI
(O’Neill et al., 2014). Based on five narratives, the SSPs describe
alternative socio-economic futures in the absence of climate policy
intervention, comprising sustainable development (SSP1), regional
rivalry (SSP3), inequality (SSP4), fossil–fueled development (SSP5),
and a middle-of-the-road development (SSP2) (O’Neill et al., 2017;
Riahi et al., 2017). The combination of SSP-based socio-economic
scenarios and RCP-based climate projections provides an integrative
frame for climate impact and policy analysis.
Transformation pathways
Trajectories describing consistent sets of possible futures of
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, atmospheric concentrations,
or global mean surface temperatures implied from mitigation and
adaptation actions associated with a set of broad and irreversible
economic, technological, societal, and behavioural changes. This can
encompass changes in the way energy and infrastructure are used
and produced, natural resources are managed and institutions are set
up and in the pace and direction of technological change (TC).
See also Scenario, Scenario storyline, Emission scenario, Mitigation
scenario, Baseline scenario, Stabilisation (of GHG or CO2-equivalent
concentration), and Narratives.
Peat Soft, porous or compressed, sedentary deposit of which
a substantial portion is partly decomposed plant material with high
water content in the natural state (up to about 90 percent) (IPCC,
). See also Peatlands.
Peatlands Peatland is a land where soils are dominated by peat.
See also Reservoir, and Sink.
Peri-urban areas Parts of a city that appear to be quite rural
but are in reality strongly linked functionally to the city in its daily
activities.
Permafrost Ground (soil or rock and included ice and
organic material) that remains at or below 0°C for at least two
consecutive years.
pH A dimensionless measure of the acidity of a solution given
by its concentration of hydrogen ions ([H+]). pH is measured on
a logarithmic scale where pH = -log10[H+]. Thus, a pH decrease of
unit corresponds to a 10-fold increase in the concentration of H+, or
acidity. See also Ocean acidification.
Phenology The relationship between biological phenomena that
recur periodically (e.g., development stages, migration) and climate
and seasonal changes.
Planetary health The Rockefeller-Lancet Commission defines
planetary health as ‘the achievement of the highest attainable
standard of health, well-being, and equity worldwide through
judicious attention to the human systems — political, economic, and
social — that shape the future of humanity and the Earth’s natural
systems that define the safe environmental limits within which
humanity can flourish. Put simply, planetary health is the health of
human civilisation and the state of the natural systems on which it
depends’ (Whitmee et al., 2015).
Political economy The set of interlinked relationships between
people, the state, society and markets as defined by law, politics,
economics, customs and power that determine the outcome of
trade and transactions and the distribution of wealth in a country
or economy.
Pool, carbon and nitrogen A reservoir in the earth system where
elements, such as carbon and nitrogen, reside in various chemical
forms for a period of time.
Poverty A complex concept with several definitions stemming
from different schools of thought. It can refer to material
circumstances (such as need, pattern of deprivation or limited
resources), economic conditions (such as standard of living, inequality
or economic position) and/or social relationships (such as social class,
dependency, exclusion, lack of basic security or lack of entitlement).
See also Poverty eradication.
Poverty eradication A set of measures to end poverty in all its
forms everywhere. See also Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Precursors Atmospheric compounds that are not greenhouse
gases (GHGs) or aerosols, but that have an effect on GHG or aerosol
concentrations by taking part in physical or chemical processes
regulating their production or destruction rates. See also Aerosol, and
Greenhouse gas (GHG).
Pre-industrial The multi-century period prior to the onset of
large-scale industrial activity around 1750. The reference period
–1900 is used to approximate pre-industrial global mean
surface temperature (GMST). See also Industrial revolution.
Primary production The synthesis of organic compounds
by plants and microbes, on land or in the ocean, primarily by
photosynthesis using light and carbon dioxide (CO2) as sources
of energy and carbon respectively. It can also occur through
chemosynthesis, using chemical energy, e.g., in deep sea vents.
Gross Primary Production (GPP)
The total amount of carbon fixed by photosynthesis over a specific
time period.
Net primary production (NPP)
The amount of carbon accumulated through photosynthesis minus
the amount lost by plant respiration over a specified time period that
would prevail in the absence of land use.
Procedural equity See Equity
Procedural rights See Human rights.
Projection A potential future evolution of a quantity or set of
quantities, often computed with the aid of a model. Unlike predictions,
projections are conditional on assumptions concerning, for example,
future socio-economic and technological developments that may
or may not be realised. See also Climate projection, Scenario,
and Pathways.
Radiative forcing The change in the net, downward minus
upward, radiative flux (expressed in W m–2) at the tropopause or
top of atmosphere due to a change in a driver of climate change,
such as a change in the concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2),
the concentration of volcanic aerosols or the output of the Sun.
The traditional radiative forcing is computed with all tropospheric
properties held fixed at their unperturbed values, and after allowing
for stratospheric temperatures, if perturbed, to readjust to radiativedynamical
equilibrium. Radiative forcing is called instantaneous if no


change in stratospheric temperature is accounted for. The radiative
forcing once rapid adjustments are accounted for is termed the
effective radiative forcing. Radiative forcing is not to be confused with
cloud radiative forcing, which describes an unrelated measure of the
impact of clouds on the radiative flux at the top of the atmosphere.
Reasons for concern (RFCs) Elements of a classification
framework, first developed in the IPCC Third Assessment Report,
which aims to facilitate judgments about what level of climate
change may be dangerous (in the language of Article 2 of the
UNFCCC) by aggregating risks from various sectors, considering
hazards, exposures, vulnerabilities, capacities to adapt, and the
resulting impacts.
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation (REDD+) REDD+ refers to reducing emissions
from deforestation; reducing emissions from forest degradation;
conservation of forest carbon stocks; sustainable management
of forests; and enhancement of forest carbon stocks (see UNFCCC
decision 1/CP.16, para. 70).
Reference period The period relative to which anomalies are
computed. See also Anomalies.
Reference scenario See Baseline scenario.
Reforestation Conversion to forest of land that has previously
contained forests but that has been converted to some other use.
[Note: For a discussion of the term forest and related terms such
as afforestation, reforestation and deforestation in the context
of reporting and accounting Article 3.3 and 3.4 activities under
the Kyoto Protocol, see 2013 Revised Supplementary Methods
and Good Practice Guidance Arising from the Kyoto Protocol.] See
also Afforestation, Deforestation, and Reducing Emissions from
Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+).
Region A relatively large-scale land or ocean area characterised
by specific geographical and climatological features. The climate of
a land-based region is affected by regional and local scale features
like topography, land use characteristics and large water bodies, as
well as remote influences from other regions, in addition to global
climate conditions. The IPCC defines a set of standard regions for
analyses of observed climate trends and climate model projections
(see IPCC 2018, Fig. 3.2; AR5, SREX).
Remaining carbon budget Cumulative global carbon dioxide
(CO2) emissions from the start of 2018 to the time that CO2 emissions
reach net-zero that would result, at some probability, in limiting
global warming to a given level, accounting for the impact of other
anthropogenic emissions. See also Carbon budget.
Representative concentration pathways (RCPs) See
Pathways.
Reservoir A component or components of the climate system
where a greenhouse gas (GHG) or a precursor of a greenhouse gas is
stored (UNFCCC Article 1.7).
Resilience The capacity of interconnected social, economic
and ecological systems to cope with a hazardous event, trend or
disturbance, responding or reorganising in ways that maintain their
essential function, identity and structure. Resilience is a positive
attribute when it maintains capacity for adaptation, learning and/
or transformation (adapted from the Arctic Council, 2013). See also
Hazard, Risk, and Vulnerability.
Respiration The process whereby living organisms convert
organic matter to carbon dioxide (CO2), releasing energy and
consuming molecular oxygen.
Rewetting ‘The deliberate action of changing a drained soil
into a wet soil, e.g. by blocking drainage ditches, disabling pumping
facilities or breaching obstructions’ (IPCC, 2013). See also Drainage.
Risk The potential for adverse consequences for human or
ecological systems, recognising the diversity of values and objectives
associated with such systems. In the context of climate change,
risks can arise from potential impacts of climate change as well as
human responses to climate change. Relevant adverse consequences
include those on lives, livelihoods, health and well-being, economic,
social and cultural assets and investments, infrastructure, services
(including ecosystem services), ecosystems and species.
In the context of climate change impacts, risks result from dynamic
interactions between climate-related hazards with the exposure
and vulnerability of the affected human or ecological system to the
hazards. Hazards, exposure and vulnerability may each be subject
to uncertainty in terms of magnitude and likelihood of occurrence,
and each may change over time and space due to socio-economic
changes and human decision-making (see also risk management,
adaptation, and mitigation).
In the context of climate change responses, risks result from the
potential for such responses not achieving the intended objective(s),
or from potential trade-offs with, or negative side-effects on, other
societal objectives, such as the Sustainable Development Goals (see
also risk trade-off). Risks can arise for example from uncertainty in
implementation, effectiveness or outcomes of climate policy, climaterelated
investments, technology development or adoption, and
system transitions.
Risk assessment The qualitative and/or quantitative scientific
estimation of risks. See also Risk management, and Risk perception.
Risk management Plans, actions, strategies or policies to reduce
the likelihood and/or magnitude of adverse potential consequences,
based on assessed or perceived risks. See also Risk assessment, and
Risk perception.
Risk perception The subjective judgment that people make about
the characteristics and severity of a risk. See also Risk assessment,
and Risk management.
Risk trade-off The change in portfolio of risks that occurs when
a countervailing risk is generated (knowingly or inadvertently) by an
intervention to reduce the target risk (Wiener and Graham, 2009).
See also Adverse side-effect, and Co-benefits.
Runoff The flow of water over the surface or through the
subsurface, which typically originates from the part of liquid
precipitation and/or snow/ice melt that does not evaporate or
refreeze, and is not transpired. See also Hydrological cycle.
Saline soils Soils with levels of soluble salts (commonly sulphates
and chlorides of calcium and magnesium) in the saturation extract

Glossary Annex I
AI
high enough to negatively affect plant growth. Saline soils are usually
flocculated and have good water permeability (Well and Brady, 2016).
See also Soil salinity and Sodic soils.
Scenario A plausible description of how the future may develop
based on a coherent and internally consistent set of assumptions
about key driving forces (e.g., rate of technological change (TC),
prices) and relationships. Note that scenarios are neither predictions
nor forecasts, but are used to provide a view of the implications
of developments and actions. See also Baseline scenario, Emission
scenario, Mitigation scenario and Pathways.
Scenario storyline A narrative description of a scenario (or
family of scenarios), highlighting the main scenario characteristics,
relationships between key driving forces and the dynamics of their
evolution. Also referred to as ‘narratives’ in the scenario literature.
Sea ice Ice found at the sea surface that has originated from
the freezing of seawater. Sea ice may be discontinuous pieces (ice
floes) moved on the ocean surface by wind and currents (pack ice),
or a motionless sheet attached to the coast (land-fast ice). Sea ice
concentration is the fraction of the ocean covered by ice. Sea ice less
than one year old is called first-year ice. Perennial ice is sea ice that
survives at least one summer. It may be subdivided into second-year
ice and multi-year ice, where multi-year ice has survived at least
two summers.
Sea level change (sea level rise/sea level fall) Change to
the height of sea level, both globally and locally (relative sea level
change) due to (1) a change in ocean volume as a result of a change
in the mass of water in the ocean, (2) changes in ocean volume
as a result of changes in ocean water density, (3) changes in the
shape of the ocean basins and changes in the Earth’s gravitational
and rotational fields, and (4) local subsidence or uplift of the land.
Global mean sea level change resulting from change in the mass
of the ocean is called barystatic. The amount of barystatic sea level
change due to the addition or removal of a mass of water is called
its sea level equivalent (SLE). Sea level changes, both globally and
locally, resulting from changes in water density are called steric.
Density changes induced by temperature changes only are called
thermosteric, while density changes induced by salinity changes
are called halosteric. Barystatic and steric sea level changes do not
include the effect of changes in the shape of ocean basins induced by
the change in the ocean mass and its distribution.
Sea surface temperature (SST) The subsurface bulk
temperature in the top few meters of the ocean, measured by ships,
buoys, and drifters. From ships, measurements of water samples in
buckets were mostly switched in the 1940s to samples from engine
intake water. Satellite measurements of skin temperature (uppermost
layer; a fraction of a millimetre thick) in the infrared or the top
centimetre or so in the microwave are also used, but must be adjusted
to be compatible with the bulk temperature.
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction The Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 outlines seven
clear targets and four priorities for action to prevent new, and to
reduce existing disaster risks. The voluntary, non-binding agreement
recognises that the State has the primary role to reduce disaster risk
but that responsibility should be shared with other stakeholders
including local government, the private sector and other stakeholders,
with the aim for the substantial reduction of disaster risk and
losses in lives, livelihoods and health and in the economic, physical,
social, cultural and environmental assets of persons, businesses,
communities and countries.
Sequestration See Uptake and Carbon sequestration.
Shared socio-economic pathways (SSPs) See Pathways.
Short-lived climate forcers (SLCF) A set of compounds that are
primarily composed of those with short lifetimes in the atmosphere
compared to well-mixed greenhouse gases (GHGs), and are also
referred to as near-term climate forcers. This set of compounds
includes methane (CH4), which is also a well-mixed greenhouse gas,
as well as ozone (O3) and aerosols, or their precursors, and some
halogenated species that are not well-mixed greenhouse gases.
These compounds do not accumulate in the atmosphere at decadal to
centennial timescales, and so their effect on climate is predominantly
in the first decade after their emission, although their changes can still
induce long-term climate effects such as sea level change. Their effect
can be cooling or warming. A subset of exclusively warming shortlived
climate forcers is referred to as short-lived climate pollutants.
See also Long-lived climate forcers (LLCF).
Short-lived climate pollutants (SLCP) See Short-lived climate
forcers (SLCF).
Sink Any process, activity or mechanism which removes
a greenhouse gas, an aerosol or a precursor of a greenhouse gas
from the atmosphere (UNFCCC Article 1.8). See also Sequestration,
Source, and Uptake.
Small Island Developing States (SIDS) Small Island
Developing States (SIDS), as recognised by the United Nations
OHRLLS (Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island
Developing States), are a distinct group of developing countries
facing specific social, economic and environmental vulnerabilities
(UN-OHRLLS, 2011). They were recognised as a special case both for
their environment and development at the Rio Earth Summit in Brazil
in 1992. Fifty eight countries and territories are presently classified
as SIDS by the UN OHRLLS, with 38 being UN member states and
being Non-UN Members or Associate Members of the Regional
Commissions (UN-OHRLLS, 2018).
Social costs The full costs of an action in terms of social welfare
losses, including external costs associated with the impacts of this
action on the environment, the economy (GDP, employment) and on
the society as a whole.
Social cost of carbon (SCC) The net present value of aggregate
climate damages (with overall harmful damages expressed as
a number with positive sign) from one more tonne of carbon in the
form of carbon dioxide (CO2), conditional on a global emissions
trajectory over time.
Social-ecological system An integrated system that includes
human societies and ecosystems, in which humans are part of
nature. The functions of such a system arise from the interactions and
interdependence of the social and ecological subsystems. The system’s
structure is characterised by reciprocal feedbacks, emphasising that


humans must be seen as a part of, not apart from, nature (Arctic
Council, 2016; Berkes and Folke, 1998).
Social inclusion A process of improving the terms of participation
in society, particularly for people who are disadvantaged, through
enhancing opportunities, access to resources, and respect for rights
(UN DESA 2016).
Social learning A process of social interaction through which
people learn new behaviours, capacities, values, and attitudes.
Societal (social) transformation See Transformation.
Socio-economic scenario A scenario that describes a possible
future in terms of population, gross domestic product (GDP),
and other socio-economic factors relevant to understanding the
implications of climate change. See also Baseline scenario, Emission
scenario, Mitigation scenario, and Pathways.
Socio-technical transitions Where technological change is
associated with social systems and the two are inextricably linked.
Sodic soils Soils with disproportionately high concentration of
sodium (Na+) in relation to calcium (Ca2+) and magnesium (Mg2+)
adsorbed at the cation exchange site on the surface of soil particles.
Sodic soils are characterised by a poor soil structure and poor
aeration (NDSU, 2014). See also Soil salinity.
Soil carbon sequestration (SCS) Land management changes
which increase the soil organic carbon content, resulting in a net
removal of carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere.
Soil conservation The maintenance of soil fertility through
controlling erosion, preserving soil organic matter, ensuring favourable
soil physical properties, and retaining nutrients (Young, 1989).
Soil erosion The displacement of the soil by the action of water
or wind. Soil erosion is a major process of land degradation.
Soil organic carbon Carbon contained in soil organic matter.
Soil organic matter The organic component of soil, comprising
plant and animal residue at various stages of decomposition, and
soil organisms.
Soil moisture Water stored in the soil in liquid or frozen form.
Root-zone soil moisture is of most relevance for plant activity.
Soil salinity The concentration of soluble salts in the water
extracted from a saturated soil (saturation extract), comprising
chlorides and sulphates of Sodium (Na+), calcium (Ca2+) and
magnesium (Mg2+) as well as carbonate salts (adapted from FAO,
). See also Saline soils, and Sodic soils.
Source Any process or activity which releases a greenhouse gas,
an aerosol or a precursor of a greenhouse gas into the atmosphere
(UNFCCC Article 1.9). See also Sink.
Stabilisation (of GHG or CO2-equivalent concentration)
A state in which the atmospheric concentrations of one greenhouse
gas (GHG) (e.g., carbon dioxide) or of a CO2-equivalent basket of
GHGs (or a combination of GHGs and aerosols) remains constant
over time.
Stranded assets Assets exposed to devaluations or conversion
to ‘liabilities’ because of unanticipated changes in their initially
expected revenues due to innovations and/or evolutions of the
business context, including changes in public regulations at the
domestic and international levels.
Stratosphere The highly stratified region of the atmosphere
above the troposphere extending from about 10 km (ranging from 9
km at high latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on average) to about 50
km altitude. See also Atmosphere, and Troposphere.
Subnational actors State/provincial, regional, metropolitan
and local/municipal governments as well as non-party stakeholders,
such as civil society, the private sector, cities and other subnational
authorities, local communities and indigenous peoples.
Substantive rights See Human rights.
Supply-side measures See Demand and supply-side measures.
Surface temperature See Global mean surface temperature
(GMST), Land surface air temperature, and Sea surface
temperature (SST).
Sustainability A dynamic process that guarantees the
persistence of natural and human systems in an equitable manner.
Sustainable development (SD) Development that meets
the needs of the present without compromising the ability of
future generations to meet their own needs (WCED, 1987) and
balances social, economic and environmental concerns. See also
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and Development pathways
(under Pathways).
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) The 17 global goals
for development for all countries established by the United Nations
through a participatory process and elaborated in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, including ending poverty and hunger;
ensuring health and well-being, education, gender equality, clean
water and energy, and decent work; building and ensuring resilient
and sustainable infrastructure, cities and consumption; reducing
inequalities; protecting land and water ecosystems; promoting peace,
justice and partnerships; and taking urgent action on climate change.
See also Sustainable development (SD).
Sustainable forest management The stewardship and use of
forests and forest lands in a way, and at a rate, that maintains their
biodiversity, productivity, regeneration capacity, vitality and their
potential to fulfil, now and in the future, relevant ecological, economic
and social functions, at local, national, and global levels, and that
does not cause damage to other ecosystems (Forest Europe, 1993).
Sustainable intensification (of agriculture) Increasing yields
from the same area of land while decreasing negative environmental
impacts of agricultural production and increasing the provision of
environmental services (CGIAR, 2019). [Note: this definition is based
on the concept of meeting demand from a finite land area, but it
is scale-dependent. Sustainable intensification at a given scale (e.g.,
global or national) may require a decrease in production intensity
at smaller scales and in particular places (often associated with
previous, unsustainable, intensification) to achieve sustainability
(Garnett et al., 2013).]

Glossary Annex I
AI
Sustainable land management The stewardship and use of
land resources, including soils, water, animals and plants, to meet
changing human needs, while simultaneously ensuring the long-term
productive potential of these resources and the maintenance of their
environmental functions (Adapted from WOCAT, undated).
Technology transfer The exchange of knowledge, hardware and
associated software, money and goods among stakeholders, which
leads to the spread of technology for adaptation or mitigation. The
term encompasses both diffusion of technologies and technological
cooperation across and within countries.
Teleconnections A statistical association between climate
variables at widely separated, geographically-fixed spatial locations.
Teleconnections are caused by large spatial structures such as basinwide
coupled modes of ocean-atmosphere variability, Rossby wavetrains,
mid-latitude jets and storm tracks, etc.
Temperature overshoot The temporary exceedance of a
specified level of global warming, such as 1.5°C. Overshoot implies
a peak followed by a decline in global warming, achieved through
anthropogenic removal of carbon dioxide (CO2) exceeding remaining
CO2 emissions globally. See also Pathways (Subterms: Overshoot
pathways, Non-overshoot Pathways).
Tier In the context of the IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse
Gas Inventories, a tier represents a level of methodological complexity.
Usually three tiers are provided. Tier 1 is the basic method, Tier 2
intermediate and Tier 3 most demanding in terms of complexity
and data requirements. Tiers 2 and 3 are sometimes referred to as
higher tier methods and are generally considered to be more accurate
(IPCC, 2019).
Tipping point A level of change in system properties beyond
which a system reorganises, often abruptly, and does not return to
the initial state even if the drivers of the change are abated. For the
climate system, it refers to a critical threshold beyond which global
or regional climate changes from one stable state to another stable
state. Tipping points are also used when referring to impact: the term
can imply that an impact tipping point is (about to be) reached in
a natural or human system. See also Irreversibility.
Transformation A change in the fundamental attributes of
natural and human systems.
Societal (social) transformation
A profound and often deliberate shift initiated by communities toward
sustainability, facilitated by changes in individual and collective
values and behaviours, and a fairer balance of political, cultural, and
institutional power in society.
Transformation pathways See Pathways.
Transformational adaptation See Adaptation.
Transformative change A system wide change that alters the
fundamental attributes of the system.
Transient climate response to cumulative CO2 emissions
(TCRE) The transient global average surface temperature change
per unit cumulative carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, usually 1000
GtC. TCRE combines both information on the airborne fraction of
cumulative CO2 emissions (the fraction of the total CO2 emitted that
remains in the atmosphere, which is determined by carbon cycle
processes) and on the transient climate response (TCR). See also
Transient climate response (TCR) (under Climate sensitivity).
Transit-oriented development (TOD) An approach to urban
development that maximises the amount of residential, business and
leisure space within walking distance of efficient public transport, so
as to enhance mobility of citizens, the viability of public transport and
the value of urban land in mutually supporting ways.
Transition The process of changing from one state or condition to
another in a given period of time. Transition can occur in individuals,
firms, cities, regions and nations, and can be based on incremental or
transformative change.
Tropical cyclone The general term for a strong, cyclonic-scale
disturbance that originates over tropical oceans. Distinguished from
weaker systems (often named tropical disturbances or depressions)
by exceeding a threshold wind speed. A tropical storm is a tropical
cyclone with one-minute average surface winds between 18 and
m s–1. Beyond 32 m s–1, a tropical cyclone is called a hurricane,
typhoon, or cyclone, depending on geographic location. See also
Extratropical cyclone.
Troposphere The lowest part of the atmosphere, from the surface
to about 10 km in altitude at mid-latitudes (ranging from 9 km at
high latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on average), where clouds and
weather phenomena occur. In the troposphere, temperatures generally
decrease with height. See also Atmosphere, and Stratosphere.
Uncertainty A state of incomplete knowledge that can result
from a lack of information or from disagreement about what is
known or even knowable. It may have many types of sources,
from imprecision in the data to ambiguously defined concepts or
terminology, incomplete understanding of critical processes, or
uncertain projections of human behaviour. Uncertainty can therefore
be represented by quantitative measures (e.g., a probability density
function) or by qualitative statements (e.g., reflecting the judgment
of a team of experts) (see IPCC, 2004; Mastrandrea et al., 2010; Moss
and Schneider, 2000). See also Confidence, and Likelihood.
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
(UNCCD) A legally binding international agreement linking
environment and development to sustainable land management,
established in 1994. The Convention’s objective is ‘to combat
desertification and mitigate the effects of drought in countries
experiencing drought and/or desertification’. The Convention
specifically addresses the arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas,
known as the drylands, and has a particular focus on Africa. As of
October 2018, the UNCCD had 197 Parties.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) The UNFCCC was adopted in May 1992 and opened for
signature at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. It entered into
force in March 1994 and as of May 2018 had 197 Parties (196 States
and the European Union). The Convention’s ultimate objective is the
‘stabilisation of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere
at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference
with the climate system’. The provisions of the Convention are
pursued and implemented by two treaties: the Kyoto Protocol and
the Paris Agreement.


Urban green infrastructure Public and private green spaces,
including remnant native vegetation, parks, private gardens, golf
courses, street trees, urban farming and engineered options such
as green roofs, green walls, biofilters and raingardens (Norton et
al., 2015).
Urban and Peri-urban agriculture ‘The cultivation of crops and
rearing of animals for food and other uses within and surrounding
the boundaries of cities, including fisheries and forestry’ (EPRS, 2014).
Uptake The addition of a substance of concern to a reservoir. See
also Carbon sequestration, and Sink.
Vegetation browning A decrease in photosynthetically active
plant biomass which is inferred from satellite observations.
Vegetation greening An increase in photosynthetically active
plant biomass which is inferred from satellite observations.
Vulnerability The propensity or predisposition to be adversely
affected. Vulnerability encompasses a variety of concepts and
elements including sensitivity or susceptibility to harm and lack of
capacity to cope and adapt. See also Exposure, Hazard, and Risk.
Water cycle See Hydrological cycle.
Well-being A state of existence that fulfils various human needs,
including material living conditions and quality of life, as well as
the ability to pursue one’s goals, to thrive, and feel satisfied with
one’s life. Ecosystem well-being refers to the ability of ecosystems to
maintain their diversity and quality.
Wetland Land that is covered or saturated by water for all or part
of the year (e.g., peatland).
