
Acclimatisation
The physiological adaptation to climatic variations.
Active layer
The top layer of soil or rock in permafrost that is subjected to
seasonal freezing and thawing.
Adaptability
See adaptive capacity.
Adaptation
Adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual or
expected climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm
or exploits beneficial opportunities. Various types of adaptation
can be distinguished, including anticipatory, autonomous and
planned adaptation:
Anticipatory adaptation – Adaptation that takes place before
impacts of climate change are observed.Also referred
to as proactive adaptation.
Autonomous adaptation – Adaptation that does not constitute
a conscious response to climatic stimuli but is
triggered by ecological changes in natural systems
and by market or welfare changes in human systems.
Also referred to as spontaneous adaptation.
Planned adaptation – Adaptation that is the result of a deliberate
policy decision, based on an awareness that
conditions have changed or are about to change and
that action is required to return to, maintain, or
achieve a desired state.
Adaptation assessment
The practice of identifying options to adapt to climate change
and evaluating them in terms of criteria such as availability, benefits,
costs, effectiveness, efficiency and feasibility.
Adaptation benefits
The avoided damage costs or the accrued benefits following the
adoption and implementation of adaptation measures.
Adaptation costs
Costs of planning, preparing for, facilitating, and implementing
adaptation measures, including transition costs.
Adaptive capacity (in relation to climate change impacts)
The ability of a system to adjust to climate change (including
climate variability and extremes) to moderate potential damages,
to take advantage of opportunities, or to cope with the consequences.
Aerosols
A collection of air-borne solid or liquid particles, with a typical
size between 0.01 and 10 μm, that reside in the atmosphere for
at least several hours. Aerosols may be of either natural or anthropogenic
origin.Aerosols may influence climate in two ways:
directly through scattering and absorbing radiation, and indirectly
through acting as condensation nuclei for cloud formation
or modifying the optical properties and lifetime of clouds.
Afforestation
Direct human-induced conversion of land that has not been
forested for a period of at least 50 years to forested land through
planting, seeding and/or the human-induced promotion of natural
seed sources. See also reforestation and deforestation. For a
discussion of the term forest and related terms such as afforestation,
reforestation and deforestation, see the IPCC Special
Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry (IPCC,
).
Aggregate impacts
Total impacts integrated across sectors and/or regions. The aggregation
of impacts requires knowledge of (or assumptions
about) the relative importance of impacts in different sectors and
regions. Measures of aggregate impacts include, for example,
the total number of people affected, or the total economic costs.
Albedo
The fraction of solar radiation reflected by a surface or object,
often expressed as a percentage. Snow-covered surfaces have a
Appendix I: Glossary
Notes:
. This glossary defines some specific terms as the lead authors intend them to be interpreted in the context of this Report.
.Words in italic indicate that the following term is also contained in this glossary.
high albedo; the albedo of soils ranges from high to low; vegetation-
covered surfaces and oceans have a low albedo. The
Earth’s albedo varies mainly through varying cloudiness, snow,
ice, leaf area, and land-cover changes.
Algae
Photosynthetic, often microscopic and planktonic, organisms occurring
in marine and freshwater ecosystems.
Algal bloom
A reproductive explosion of algae in a lake, river or ocean.
Alpine
The biogeographic zone made up of slopes above the tree line
characterised by the presence of rosette-forming herbaceous
plants and low, shrubby, slow-growing woody plants.
Anthropogenic
Resulting from or produced by human beings.
AOGCM
See climate model.
Aquaculture
The managed cultivation of aquatic plants or animals such as
salmon or shellfish held in captivity for the purpose of harvesting.
Aquifer
A stratum of permeable rock that bears water. An unconfined
aquifer is recharged directly by local rainfall, rivers and lakes,
and the rate of recharge will be influenced by the permeability
of the overlying rocks and soils.
Aragonite
Acalcium carbonate (limestone) mineral, used by shell- or skeleton-
forming, calcifying organisms such as corals (warm- and coldwater
corals), some macroalgae, pteropods (marine snails) and
non-pteropod molluscs such as bivalves (e.g., clams, oysters),
cephalopods (e.g., squids, octopuses).Aragonite is more sensitive
to ocean acidification than calcite, also used by many marine organisms.
See also calcite and ocean acidification.
Arbovirus
Any of various viruses transmitted by blood-sucking arthropods
(e.g., mosquitoes, ticks, etc.) and including the causative agents
of dengue fever, yellow fever, and some types of encephalitis.
Arid region
A land region of low rainfall, where ‘low’ is widely accepted to
be <250 mm precipitation per year.
Atmosphere
The gaseous envelope surrounding the Earth. The dry atmosphere
consists almost entirely of nitrogen and oxygen, together
with trace gases including carbon dioxide and ozone.
Attribution
See Detection and attribution
Baseline/reference
The baseline (or reference) is the state against which change is
measured. It might be a ‘current baseline’, in which case it represents
observable, present-day conditions. It might also be a
‘future baseline’, which is a projected future set of conditions
excluding the driving factor of interest. Alternative interpretations
of the reference conditions can give rise to multiple baselines.
Basin
The drainage area of a stream, river or lake.
Benthic community
The community of organisms living on or near the bottom of a
water body such as a river, a lake or an ocean.
Biodiversity
The total diversity of all organisms and ecosystems at various
spatial scales (from genes to entire biomes).
Biofuel
A fuel produced from organic matter or combustible oils produced
by plants. Examples of biofuel include alcohol, black
liquor from the paper-manufacturing process, wood, and soybean
oil.
Biomass
The total mass of living organisms in a given area or volume; recently
dead plant material is often included as dead biomass.
The quantity of biomass is expressed as a dry weight or as the
energy, carbon or nitrogen content.
Biome
Major and distinct regional element of the biosphere, typically
consisting of several ecosystems (e.g., forests, rivers, ponds,
swamps) within a region of similar climate. Biomes are characterised
by typical communities of plants and animals.
Biosphere
The part of the Earth system comprising all ecosystems and living
organisms in the atmosphere, on land (terrestrial biosphere),
or in the oceans (marine biosphere), including derived dead organic
matter, such as litter, soil organic matter, and oceanic detritus.
Biota
All living organisms of an area; the flora and fauna considered
as a unit.
Bog
Peat-accumulating acidic wetland.
Boreal forest
Forests of pine, spruce, fir and larch stretching from the east
coast of Canada westward toAlaska and continuing from Siberia
Appendix I: Glossary

westward across the entire extent of Russia to the European
Plain. The climate is continental, with long, very cold winters
(up to 6 months with mean temperatures below freezing), and
short, cool summers (50 to 100 frost-free days). Precipitation increases
during summer months, although annual precipitation is
still small. Low evaporation rates can make this a humid climate.
See taiga.
Breakwater
Ahard engineering structure built in the sea which, by breaking
waves, protects a harbour, anchorage, beach or shore area. A
breakwater can be attached to the coast or lie offshore.
C3 plants
Plants that produce a three-carbon compound during photosynthesis,
including most trees and agricultural crops such as rice,
wheat, soybeans, potatoes and vegetables.
C4 plants
Plants, mainly of tropical origin, that produce a four-carbon compound
during photosynthesis, includingmany grasses and the agriculturally
important cropsmaize, sugar cane,millet and sorghum.
Calcareous organisms
A large and diverse group of organisms, many marine, that use
calcite or aragonite to form shells or skeletons. See calcite,
aragonite and ocean acidification.
Calcite
A calcium carbonate (limestone) mineral, used by shell- or
skeleton-forming, calcifying organisms such as foraminifera,
some macroalgae, lobsters, crabs, sea urchins and starfish. Calcite
is less sensitive to ocean acidification than aragonite, also
used by many marine organisms. See also aragonite and ocean
acidification.
Capacity building
In the context of climate change, capacity building is developing
the technical skills and institutional capabilities in developing
countries and economies in transition to enable their
participation in all aspects of adaptation to, mitigation of, and research
on climate change, and in the implementation of the
Kyoto Mechanisms, etc.
Carbon cycle
The term used to describe the flow of carbon (in various forms,
e.g., carbon dioxide) through the atmosphere, ocean, terrestrial
biosphere and lithosphere.
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
A naturally occurring gas fixed by photosynthesis into organic
matter. A by-product of fossil fuel combustion and biomass
burning, it is also emitted from land-use changes and other industrial
processes. It is the principal anthropogenic greenhouse
gas that affects the Earth’s radiative balance. It is the reference
gas against which other greenhouse gases are measured, thus
having a GlobalWarming Potential of 1.
Carbon dioxide fertilisation
The stimulation of plant photosynthesis due to elevated CO2 concentrations, leading to either enhanced productivity and/or
efficiency of primary production. In general, C3 plants show a
larger response to elevated CO2 than C4 plants.
Carbon sequestration
The process of increasing the carbon content of a reservoir/pool
other than the atmosphere.
Catchment
An area that collects and drains rainwater.
CDM (Clean Development Mechanism)
The CDM allows greenhouse gas emission reduction projects
to take place in countries that have no emission targets under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) Kyoto Protocol, yet are signatories.
Chagas’ disease
A parasitic disease caused by the Trypanosoma cruzi and transmitted
by triatomine bugs in the Americas, with two clinical periods:
acute (fever, swelling of the spleen, oedemas) and chronic
(digestive syndrome, potentially fatal heart condition).
Cholera
A water-borne intestinal infection caused by a bacterium (Vibrio
cholerae) that results in frequent watery stools, cramping abdominal
pain, and eventual collapse from dehydration and
shock.
Climate
Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the ‘average
weather’, or more rigorously, as the statistical description in
terms of the mean and variability of relevant quantities over a
period of time ranging from months to thousands or millions of
years. These quantities are most often surface variables such as
temperature, precipitation, and wind. Climate in a wider sense is
the state, including a statistical description, of the climate system.
The classical period of time is 30 years, as defined by the
World Meteorological Organization (WMO).
Climate change
Climate change refers to any change in climate over time,
whether due to natural variability or as a result of human activity.
This usage differs from that in the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), which defines
‘climate change’ as: ‘a change of climate which is attributed directly
or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition
of the global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate
variability observed over comparable time periods’. See
also climate variability.
Climate change commitment
Due to the thermal inertia of the ocean and slow processes in the
biosphere, the cryosphere and land surfaces, the climate would
continue to change even if the atmospheric composition was
held fixed at today’s values. Past change in atmospheric com-
Appendix I: Glossary

Appendix I: Glossary

position leads to a ‘committed’ climate change which continues
for as long as a radiative imbalance persists and until all components
of the climate system have adjusted to a new state. The
further change in temperature after the composition of the atmosphere
is held constant is referred to as the committed warming
or warming commitment. Climate change commitment
includes other future changes, for example in the hydrological
cycle, in extreme weather events, and in sea-level rise.
Climate model
A numerical representation of the climate system based on the
physical, chemical, and biological properties of its components,
their interactions and feedback processes, and accounting for all
or some of its known properties. The climate system can be represented
by models of varying complexity (i.e., for any one component
or combination of components a hierarchy of models can
be identified, differing in such aspects as the number of spatial
dimensions, the extent to which physical, chemical, or biological
processes are explicitly represented, or the level at which
empirical parameterisations are involved. Coupled atmosphere/
ocean/sea-ice General Circulation Models (AOGCMs)
provide a comprehensive representation of the climate system.
More complex models include active chemistry and biology. Climate
models are applied, as a research tool, to study and simulate
the climate, but also for operational purposes, including
monthly, seasonal, and interannual climate predictions.
Climate prediction
A climate prediction or climate forecast is the result of an attempt
to produce an estimate of the actual evolution of the climate
in the future, e.g., at seasonal, interannual or long-term
time scales. See also climate projection and climate (change)
scenario.
Climate projection
The calculated response of the climate system to emissions or
concentration scenarios of greenhouse gases and aerosols, or
radiative forcing scenarios, often based on simulations by climate
models. Climate projections are distinguished from climate
predictions, in that the former critically depend on the emissions/
concentration/radiative forcing scenario used, and therefore
on highly uncertain assumptions of future socio-economic
and technological development.
Climate (change) scenario
Aplausible and often simplified representation of the future climate,
based on an internally consistent set of climatological relationships
and assumptions of radiative forcing, typically
constructed for explicit use as input to climate change impact
models.A‘climate change scenario’ is the difference between a
climate scenario and the current climate.
Climate sensitivity
The equilibrium temperature rise that would occur for a doubling
of CO2 concentration above pre-industrial levels.
Climate system
The climate system is defined by the dynamics and interactions
of five major components: atmosphere, hydrosphere, cryosphere,
land surface, and biosphere. Climate system dynamics
are driven by both internal and external forcing, such as volcanic
eruptions, solar variations, or human-induced modifications to
the planetary radiative balance, for instance via anthropogenic
emissions of greenhouse gases and/or land-use changes.
Climate threshold
The point at which external forcing of the climate system, such
as the increasing atmospheric concentration of greenhouse
gases, triggers a significant climatic or environmental event
which is considered unalterable, or recoverable only on very
long time-scales, such as widespread bleaching of corals or a
collapse of oceanic circulation systems.
Climate variability
Climate variability refers to variations in the mean state and
other statistics (such as standard deviations, statistics of extremes,
etc.) of the climate on all temporal and spatial scales beyond
that of individual weather events. Variability may be due
to natural internal processes within the climate system (internal
variability), or to variations in natural or anthropogenic external
forcing (external variability). See also climate change.
CO2 fertilisation
See carbon dioxide fertilisation.
Coastal squeeze
The squeeze of coastal ecosystems (e.g., salt marshes, mangroves
and mud and sand flats) between rising sea levels and
naturally or artificially fixed shorelines, including hard engineering
defences (see Chapter 6).
Coccolithophores
Single-celled microscopic phytoplankton algae which construct
shell-like structures from calcite (a form of calcium carbonate).
See also calcite and ocean acidification.
Committed to extinction
This term describes a species with dwindling population that is
in the process of inescapably becoming extinct in the absence
of human intervention. See also extinction.
Communicable disease
An infectious disease caused by transmission of an infective biological
agent (virus, bacterium, protozoan, or multicellular
macroparasite).
Confidence
In this Report, the level of confidence in a statement is expressed
using a standard terminology defined in the Introduction. See
also uncertainty.
Control run
A model run carried out to provide a ‘baseline’ for comparison
with climate-change experiments. The control run uses constant
values for the radiative forcing due to greenhouse gases and anthropogenic
aerosols appropriate to pre-industrial conditions.
Appendix I: Glossary

Coral
The term ‘coral’ has several meanings, but is usually the common
name for the Order Scleractinia, all members of which have
hard limestone skeletons, and which are divided into reef-building
and non-reef-building, or cold- and warm-water corals.
Coral bleaching
The paling in colour which results if a coral loses its symbiotic,
energy-providing, organisms.
Coral reefs
Rock-like limestone (calcium carbonate) structures built by
corals along ocean coasts (fringing reefs) or on top of shallow,
submerged banks or shelves (barrier reefs, atolls), most conspicuous
in tropical and sub-tropical oceans.
Cryosphere
The component of the climate system consisting of all snow and
ice (including permafrost) on and beneath the surface of the
Earth and ocean.
Cryptogams
An outdated but still-used term, denoting a group of diverse and
taxonomically unrelated organisms, including fungi and lower
plants such as algae, lichens, hornworts, liverworts, mosses and
ferns.
Deforestation
Natural or anthropogenic process that converts forest land to
non-forest. See afforestation and reforestation.
Dengue fever
An infectious viral disease spread by mosquitoes, often called
breakbone fever because it is characterised by severe pain in the
joints and back. Subsequent infections of the virus may lead to
dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengue shock syndrome
(DSS), which may be fatal.
Desert
A region of very low rainfall, where ‘very low’ is widely accepted
to be <100 mm per year.
Desertification
Land degradation in arid, semi-arid, and dry sub-humid areas
resulting from various factors, including climatic variations and
human activities. Further, the United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification (UNCCD) defines land degradation as a
reduction or loss in arid, semi-arid, and dry sub-humid areas of
the biological or economic productivity and complexity of rainfed
cropland, irrigated cropland, or range, pasture, forest and
woodlands resulting from land uses or from a process or combination
of processes, including those arising from human activities
and habitation patterns, such as: (i) soil erosion caused by
wind and/or water; (ii) deterioration of the physical, chemical,
and biological or economic properties of soil; and (iii) long-term
loss of natural vegetation.
Detection and attribution
Detection of change in a system (natural or human) is the
process of demonstrating that the system has changed in some
defined statistical sense, without providing a reason for that
change.
Attribution of such an observed change in a system to anthropogenic
climate change is usually a two-stage process. First, the
observed change in the system must be demonstrated to be associated
with an observed regional climate change with a specified
degree of confidence. Second, a measurable portion of the
observed regional climate change, or the associated observed
change in the system, must be attributed to anthropogenic climate
forcing with a similar degree of confidence.
Confidence in such joint attribution statements must be lower
than the confidence in either of the individual attribution steps
alone due to the combination of two separate statistical assessments.
Diadromous
Fish that travel between salt water and freshwater.
Discount rate
The degree to which consumption now is preferred to consumption
one year hence, with prices held constant, but average
incomes rising in line with GDP per capita.
Disturbance regime
Frequency, intensity, and types of disturbances, such as fires, insect
or pest outbreaks, floods and droughts.
Downscaling
A method that derives local- to regional-scale (10 to 100 km)
information from larger-scale models or data analyses.
Drought
The phenomenon that exists when precipitation is significantly
below normal recorded levels, causing serious hydrological imbalances
that often adversely affect land resources and production
systems.
Dyke
A human-made wall or embankment along a shore to prevent
flooding of low-lying land.
Dynamic global vegetation model (DGVM)
Models that simulate vegetation development and dynamics
through space and time, as driven by climate and other environmental
changes.
Ecological community
Acommunity of plants and animals characterised by a typical assemblage
of species and their abundances. See also ecosystem.
Ecological corridor
A thin strip of vegetation used by wildlife, potentially allowing
movement of biotic factors between two areas.
Ecophysiological process
Individual organisms respond to environmental variability, such
as climate change, through ecophysiological processes which
operate continuously, generally at a microscopic or sub-organ
scale. Ecophysiological mechanisms underpin individual organism’s
tolerance to environmental stress, and comprise a
broad range of responses defining the absolute tolerance limits
of individuals to environmental conditions. Ecophysiological responses
may scale up to control species geographic ranges.
Ecosystem
The interactive system formed from all living organisms and
their abiotic (physical and chemical) environment within a given
area. Ecosystems cover a hierarchy of spatial scales and can
comprise the entire globe, biomes at the continental scale or
small, well-circumscribed systems such as a small pond.
Ecosystem approach
The ecosystem approach is a strategy for the integrated management
of land, water and living resources that promotes conservation
and sustainable use in an equitable way.An ecosystem
approach is based on the application of appropriate scientific
methodologies focused on levels of biological organisation,
which encompass the essential structure, processes, functions
and interactions among organisms and their environment. It
recognises that humans, with their cultural diversity, are an integral
component of many ecosystems. The ecosystem approach
requires adaptive management to deal with the complex and dynamic
nature of ecosystems and the absence of complete knowledge
or understanding of their functioning. Priority targets are
conservation of biodiversity and of the ecosystem structure and
functioning, in order to maintain ecosystem services.
Ecosystem services
Ecological processes or functions having monetary or non-monetary
value to individuals or society at large. There are (i) supporting
services such as productivity or biodiversity
maintenance, (ii) provisioning services such as food, fibre, or
fish, (iii) regulating services such as climate regulation or carbon
sequestration, and (iv) cultural services such as tourism or
spiritual and aesthetic appreciation.
Ecotone
Transition area between adjacent ecological communities (e.g.,
between forests and grasslands).
El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
El Niño, in its original sense, is a warm-water current that periodically
flows along the coast of Ecuador and Peru, disrupting the
local fishery. This oceanic event is associated with a fluctuation of
the inter-tropical surface pressure pattern and circulation in the Indian
and PacificOceans, called the SouthernOscillation. This coupled
atmosphere-ocean phenomenon is collectively known as El
Niño-Southern Oscillation. During an El Niño event, the prevailing
tradewindsweaken and the equatorial countercurrent strengthens,
causing warm surface waters in the Indonesian area to flow
eastward to overlie the cold waters of the Peru current. This event
has great impact on the wind, sea surface temperature, and precipitation
patterns in the tropical Pacific. It has climatic effects
throughout the Pacific region and inmany other parts of theworld.
The opposite of an El Niño event is called La Niña.
Emissions scenario
A plausible representation of the future development of emissions
of substances that are potentially radiatively active (e.g.,
greenhouse gases, aerosols), based on a coherent and internally
consistent set of assumptions about driving forces (such as demographic
and socio-economic development, technological
change) and their key relationships. In 1992, the IPCC presented
a set of emissions scenarios that were used as a basis for the climate
projections in the SecondAssessment Report. These emissions
scenarios are referred to as the IS92 scenarios. In the IPCC
Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) (Nakićenović et
al., 2000), new emissions scenarios – the so-called SRES scenarios
– were published.
Endemic
Restricted or peculiar to a locality or region. With regard to
human health, endemic can refer to a disease or agent present
or usually prevalent in a population or geographical area at all
times.
Ensemble
A group of parallel model simulations used for climate projections.
Variation of the results across the ensemble members gives
an estimate of uncertainty. Ensembles made with the same
model but different initial conditions only characterise the uncertainty
associated with internal climate variability, whereas
multi-model ensembles including simulations by several models
also include the impact of model differences.
Epidemic
Occurring suddenly in incidence rates clearly in excess of normal
expectancy, applied especially to infectious diseases but
may also refer to any disease, injury, or other health-related
event occurring in such outbreaks.
Erosion
The process of removal and transport of soil and rock by weathering,
mass wasting, and the action of streams, glaciers, waves,
winds and underground water.
Eustatic sea-level rise
See sea-level rise.
Eutrophication
The process by which a body of water (often shallow) becomes
(either naturally or by pollution) rich in dissolved nutrients, with
a seasonal deficiency in dissolved oxygen.
Evaporation
The transition process from liquid to gaseous state.
Evapotranspiration
The combined process of water evaporation from the Earth’s
surface and transpiration from vegetation.
Appendix I: Glossary

Externalities
Occur when a change in the production or consumption of one
individual or firm affects indirectly the well-being of another individual
or firm. Externalities can be positive or negative. The
impacts of pollution on ecosystems, water courses or air quality
represent classic cases of negative externality.
Extinction
The global disappearance of an entire species.
Extirpation
The disappearance of a species from part of its range; local extinction.
Extreme weather event
An event that is rare within its statistical reference distribution
at a particular place. Definitions of ‘rare’ vary, but an extreme
weather event would normally be as rare as or rarer than the 10th
or 90th percentile. By definition, the characteristics of what is
called ‘extreme weather’may vary from place to place. Extreme
weather events may typically include floods and droughts.
Feedback
An interaction mechanism between processes is called a feedback.
When the result of an initial process triggers changes in a
second process and that in turn influences the initial one.Apositive
feedback intensifies the original process, and a negative
feedback reduces it.
Food chain
The chain of trophic relationships formed if several species feed
on each other. See food web and trophic level.
Food security
A situation that exists when people have secure access to sufficient
amounts of safe and nutritious food for normal growth, development
and an active and healthy life. Food insecurity may
be caused by the unavailability of food, insufficient purchasing
power, inappropriate distribution, or inadequate use of food at
the household level.
Food web
The network of trophic relationships within an ecological community
involving several interconnected food chains.
Forecast
See climate prediction and climate projection.
Forest limit/line
The upper elevational or latitudinal limit beyond which natural
tree regeneration cannot develop into a closed forest stand. It is
typically at a lower elevation or more distant from the poles than
the tree line.
Freshwater lens
A lenticular fresh groundwater body that underlies an oceanic
island. It is underlain by saline water.
Functional extinction
This term defines a species which has lost its capacity to persist
and to recover because its populations have declined to below a
minimum size. See committed to extinction.
General Circulation Model (GCM)
See climate model.
Generalist
A species that can tolerate a wide range of environmental conditions.
Glacier
A mass of land ice flowing downhill (by internal deformation
and sliding at the base) and constrained by the surrounding topography
(e.g., the sides of a valley or surrounding peaks). A
glacier is maintained by accumulation of snow at high altitudes,
balanced by melting at low altitudes or discharge into the sea.
Globalisation
The growing integration and interdependence of countries
worldwide through the increasing volume and variety of crossborder
transactions in goods and services, free international capital
flows, and the more rapid and widespread diffusion of
technology, information and culture.
Greenhouse effect
The process in which the absorption of infrared radiation by the
atmosphere warms the Earth.
In common parlance, the term ‘greenhouse effect’ may be used
to refer either to the natural greenhouse effect, due to naturally
occurring greenhouse gases, or to the enhanced (anthropogenic)
greenhouse effect, which results from gases emitted as a result
of human activities.
Greenhouse gas
Greenhouse gases are those gaseous constituents of the atmosphere,
both natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation
at specific wavelengths within the spectrum of infrared
radiation emitted by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere, and
clouds. This property causes the greenhouse effect.Water vapour
(H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane
(CH4) and ozone (O3) are the primary greenhouse gases in the
Earth’s atmosphere. As well as CO2, N2O, and CH4, the Kyoto
Protocol deals with the greenhouse gases sulphur hexafluoride
(SF6), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and perfluorocarbons (PFCs).
Gross Domestic Product
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is the monetary value of all
goods and services produced within a nation.
Gross National Product
Gross National Product (GNP) is the monetary value of all goods
and services produced in a nation’s economy, including income
generated abroad by domestic residents, but without income
generated by foreigners.
Appendix I: Glossary

Gross primary production
The total carbon fixed by plant through photosynthesis.
Groundwater recharge
The process by which external water is added to the zone of saturation
of an aquifer, either directly into a formation or indirectly
by way of another formation.
Groyne
Alow, narrow jetty, usually extending roughly perpendicular to
the shoreline, designed to protect the shore from erosion by currents,
tides or waves, by trapping sand for the purpose of replenishing
or making a beach.
Habitat
The locality or natural home in which a particular plant, animal,
or group of closely associated organisms lives.
Hantavirus
A virus in the family Bunyaviridae that causes a type of haemorrhagic
fever. It is thought that humans catch the disease mainly
from infected rodents, either through direct contact with the animals
or by inhaling or ingesting dust that contains aerosolised
viral particles from their dried urine and other secretions.
Heat island
An urban area characterised by ambient temperatures higher
than those of the surrounding non-urban area. The cause is a
higher absorption of solar energy by materials of the urban fabric
such as asphalt.
Herbaceous
Flowering, non-woody.
Human system
Any system in which human organisations play a major role.
Often, but not always, the term is synonymous with ‘society’ or
‘social system’ e.g., agricultural system, political system, technological
system, economic system; all are human systems in
the sense applied in the AR4.
Hydrographic events
Events that alter the state or current of waters in oceans, rivers
or lakes.
Hydrological systems
The systems involved in movement, distribution, and quality of
water throughout the Earth, including both the hydrologic cycle
and water resources.
Hypolimnetic
Referring to the part of a lake below the thermocline made up of
water that is stagnant and of essentially uniform temperature except
during the period of overturn.
Hypoxic events
Events that lead to a deficiency of oxygen.
Ice cap
A dome-shaped ice mass covering a highland area that is considerably
smaller in extent than an ice sheet.
Ice sheet
A mass of land ice that is sufficiently deep to cover most of the
underlying bedrock topography. An ice sheet flows outwards
from a high central plateau with a small average surface slope.
The margins slope steeply, and the ice is discharged through fastflowing
ice streams or outlet glaciers, in some cases into the sea
or into ice shelves floating on the sea. There are only two large
ice sheets in the modern world – on Greenland and Antarctica,
the Antarctic ice sheet being divided into east and west by the
TransantarcticMountains; during glacial periods there were others.
Ice shelf
Afloating ice sheet of considerable thickness attached to a coast
(usually of great horizontal extent with a level or gently undulating
surface); often a seaward extension of ice sheets. Nearly
all ice shelves are in Antarctica.
(climate change) Impact assessment
The practice of identifying and evaluating, in monetary and/or
non-monetary terms, the effects of climate change on natural
and human systems.
(climate change) Impacts
The effects of climate change on natural and human systems.
Depending on the consideration of adaptation, one can distinguish
between potential impacts and residual impacts:
Potential impacts: all impacts that may occur given a projected
change in climate, without considering adaptation.
Residual impacts: the impacts of climate change that would
occur after adaptation. See also aggregate impacts, market
impacts, and non-market impacts.
Indigenous peoples
No internationally accepted definition of indigenous peoples exists.
Common characteristics often applied under international
law, and by United Nations agencies to distinguish indigenous
peoples include: residence within or attachment to geographically
distinct traditional habitats, ancestral territories, and their
natural resources; maintenance of cultural and social identities,
and social, economic, cultural and political institutions separate
from mainstream or dominant societies and cultures; descent
from population groups present in a given area, most frequently
before modern states or territories were created and current borders
defined; and self-identification as being part of a distinct
indigenous cultural group, and the desire to preserve that cultural
identity.
Industrial revolution
Aperiod of rapid industrial growth with far-reaching social and
economic consequences, beginning in England during the second
half of the 18th century and spreading to Europe and later
to other countries including the USA. The industrial revolution
marks the beginning of a strong increase in combustion of fos-
Appendix I: Glossary

sil fuels and related emissions of carbon dioxide. In the AR4,
the term ‘pre-industrial’ refers, somewhat arbitrarily, to the period
before 1750.
Infectious disease
Any disease caused by microbial agents that can be transmitted
from one person to another or from animals to people. This may
occur by direct physical contact, by handling of an object that
has picked up infective organisms, through a disease carrier, via
contaminated water, or by the spread of infected droplets
coughed or exhaled into the air.
Infrastructure
The basic equipment, utilities, productive enterprises, installations
and services essential for the development, operation and
growth of an organisation, city or nation.
Integrated assessment
An interdisciplinary process of combining, interpreting and
communicating knowledge from diverse scientific disciplines
so that all relevant aspects of a complex societal issue can be
evaluated and considered for the benefit of decision-making.
Integrated water resources management (IWRM)
The prevailing concept for water management which, however,
has not been defined unambiguously. IWRM is based on four
principles that were formulated by the International Conference
onWater and the Environment in Dublin, 1992: (1) fresh water
is a finite and vulnerable resource, essential to sustain life, development
and the environment; (2) water development and
management should be based on a participatory approach, involving
users, planners and policy-makers at all levels; (3)
women play a central part in the provision, management and
safeguarding of water; (4) water has an economic value in all its
competing uses and should be recognised as an economic good.
Invasive species and invasive alien species (IAS)
Aspecies aggressively expanding its range and population density
into a region in which it is not native, often through outcompeting
or otherwise dominating native species.
Irrigation water-use efficiency
Irrigation water-use efficiency is the amount of biomass or seed
yield produced per unit irrigation water applied, typically about
tonne of dry matter per 100 mm water applied.
Isohyet
A line on a map connecting locations that receive the same
amount of rainfall.
Joint attribution
Involves both attribution of observed changes to regional climate
change and attribution of a measurable portion of either
regional climate change or the associated observed changes in
the system to anthropogenic causes, beyond natural variability.
This process involves statistically linking climate-change simulations
from climate models with the observed responses in the
natural or managed system. Confidence in joint attribution statements
must be lower than the confidence in either of the individual
attribution steps alone due to the combination of two separate
statistical assessments.
Keystone species
A species that has a central servicing role affecting many other
organisms and whose demise is likely to result in the loss of a
number of species and lead to major changes in ecosystem function.
Kyoto Protocol
The Kyoto Protocol was adopted at the Third Session of the
Conference of the Parties (COP) to the UN Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1997 in Kyoto, Japan.
It contains legally binding commitments, in addition to those included
in the UNFCCC. Countries included in Annex B of the
Protocol (most member countries of the Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) and those with
economies in transition) agreed to reduce their anthropogenic
greenhouse gas emissions (CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs, and
SF6) by at least 5% below 1990 levels in the commitment period
to 2012. The Kyoto Protocol entered into force on 16 February
.
La Niña
See El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO).
Landslide
Amass of material that has slipped downhill by gravity, often assisted
by water when the material is saturated; the rapid movement
of a mass of soil, rock or debris down a slope.
Large-scale singularities
Abrupt and dramatic changes in the state of given systems, in
response to gradual changes in driving forces. For example, a
gradual increase in atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations
may lead to such large-scale singularities as slowdown or collapse
of the thermohaline circulation or collapse of the West
Antarctic ice sheet. The occurrence, magnitude, and timing of
large-scale singularities are difficult to predict.
Last Glacial Maximum
The Last Glacial Maximum refers to the time of maximum extent
of the ice sheets during the last glaciation, approximately
,000 years ago.
Leaching
The removal of soil elements or applied chemicals by water
movement through the soil.
Leaf area index (LAI)
The ratio between the total leaf surface area of a plant and the
ground area covered by its leaves.
Legume
Plants that fix nitrogen from the air through a symbiotic relationship
with bacteria in their soil and root systems (e.g., soybean,
peas, beans, lucerne, clovers).
Appendix I: Glossary

Likelihood
The likelihood of an occurrence, an outcome or a result, where
this can be estimated probabilistically, is expressed in this Report
using a standard terminology, defined in the Introduction. See
also uncertainty and confidence.
Limnology
Study of lakes and their biota.
Littoral zone
A coastal region; the zone between high and low watermarks.
Malaria
Endemic or epidemic parasitic disease caused by species of the
genus Plasmodium (Protozoa) and transmitted by mosquitoes of
the genus Anopheles; produces bouts of high fever and systemic
disorders, affects about 300 million and kills approximately
million people worldwide every year.
Market impacts
Impacts that can be quantified in monetary terms, and directly
affect Gross Domestic Product – e.g., changes in the price of
agricultural inputs and/or goods. See also non-market impacts.
Meningitis
Inflammation of the meninges (part of the covering of the brain),
usually caused by bacteria, viruses or fungi.
Meridional overturning circulation (MOC)
See thermohaline circulation (THC).
Microclimate
Local climate at or near the Earth’s surface. See also climate.
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
A list of ten goals, including eradicating extreme poverty and
hunger, improving maternal health, and ensuring environmental
sustainability, adopted in 2000 by the UN General Assembly,
i.e., 191 States, to be reached by 2015. The MDGs commit the
international community to an expanded vision of development,
and have been commonly accepted as a framework for measuring
development progress.
Mires
Peat-accumulating wetlands. See bog.
Mitigation
An anthropogenic intervention to reduce the anthropogenic forcing
of the climate system; it includes strategies to reduce greenhouse
gas sources and emissions and enhancing greenhouse gas
sinks.
Mixed layer
The upper region of the ocean, well mixed by interaction with
the overlying atmosphere.
Monsoon
A monsoon is a tropical and sub-tropical seasonal reversal in
both the surface winds and associated precipitation.
Montane
The biogeographic zone made up of relatively moist, cool upland
slopes below the sub-alpine zone that is characterised by
the presence of mixed deciduous at lower and coniferous evergreen
forests at higher elevations.
Morbidity
Rate of occurrence of disease or other health disorders within a
population, taking account of the age-specific morbidity rates.
Morbidity indicators include chronic disease incidence/prevalence,
rates of hospitalisation, primary care consultations, disability-
days (i.e., days of absence from work), and prevalence
of symptoms.
Morphology
The form and structure of an organism or land-form, or any of
its parts.
Mortality
Rate of occurrence of deathwithin a population; calculation ofmortality
takes account of age-specific death rates, and can thus yield
measures of life expectancy and the extent of premature death.
Net biome production (NBP)
Net biome production is the net ecosystem production (NEP)
minus carbon losses resulting from disturbances such as fire or
insect defoliation.
Net ecosystem production (NEP)
Net ecosystem production is the difference between net primary
production (NPP) and heterotrophic respiration (mostly decomposition
of dead organic matter) of that ecosystem over the
same area (see also net biome production (NBP).
Net primary production (NPP)
Net primary production is the gross primary production minus
autotrophic respiration, i.e., the sum of metabolic processes for
plant growth and maintenance, over the same area.
Nitrogen oxides (NOx)
Any of several oxides of nitrogen.
No regrets policy
A policy that would generate net social and/or economic benefits
irrespective of whether or not anthropogenic climate change
occurs.
Non-linearity
Aprocess is called ‘non-linear’ when there is no simple proportional
relation between cause and effect.
Non-market impacts
Impacts that affect ecosystems or human welfare, but that are
not easily expressed in monetary terms, e.g., an increased risk of
premature death, or increases in the number of people at risk of
hunger. See also market impacts.
Appendix I: Glossary

Normalised difference vegetation index (NDVI)
Asatellite-based remotely sensed measure of the ‘greenness’ of
the vegetation cover.
North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO)
The NorthAtlantic Oscillation (NAO) consists of opposing variations
of barometric pressure near Iceland and near the Azores.
It is the dominant mode of winter climate variability in the North
Atlantic region.
Ocean acidification
Increased concentrations of CO2 in sea water causing a measurable
increase in acidity (i.e., a reduction in ocean pH). This may
lead to reduced calcification rates of calcifying organisms such
as corals, molluscs, algae and crustacea.
Ombrotrophic bog
An acidic peat-accumulating wetland that is rainwater (instead
of groundwater) fed and thus particularly poor in nutrients.
Opportunity costs
The cost of an economic activity forgone through the choice of
another activity.
Ozone
The triatomic form of oxygen (O3), a gaseous atmospheric constituent.
In the troposphere, it is created both naturally and by
photochemical reactions involving gases resulting from human
activities (photochemical smog). In high concentrations, tropospheric
ozone can be harmful to many living organisms. Tropospheric
ozone acts as a greenhouse gas. In the stratosphere,
ozone is created by the interaction between solar ultraviolet radiation
and molecular oxygen (O2). Depletion of stratospheric
ozone, due to chemical reactions that may be enhanced by climate
change, results in an increased ground-level flux of ultraviolet
(UV) B radiation.
Paludification
he process of transforming land into a wetland such as a marsh,
a swamp or a bog.
Particulates
Very small solid exhaust particles emitted during the combustion
of fossil and biomass fuels. Particulates may consist of a wide
variety of substances. Of greatest concern for health are particulates
of less than or equal to 10 nm in diameter, usually designated
as PM10.
Peat
Peat is formed from dead plants, typically Sphagnum mosses,
which are only partially decomposed due to the permanent submergence
in water and the presence of conserving substances
such as humic acids.
Peatland
Typically a wetland such as a mire slowly accumulating peat.
Pelagic community
The community of organisms living in the open waters of a river,
a lake or an ocean (in contrast to benthic communities living on
or near the bottom of a water body).
Permafrost
Perennially frozen ground that occurs where the temperature remains
below 0°C for several years.
Phenology
The study of natural phenomena that recur periodically (e.g., development
stages, migration) and their relation to climate and
seasonal changes.
Photochemical smog
A mix of photochemical oxidant air pollutants produced by the
reaction of sunlight with primary air pollutants, especially hydrocarbons.
Photosynthesis
The synthesis by plants, algae and some bacteria of sugar from
sunlight, carbon dioxide and water, with oxygen as the waste
product. See also carbon dioxide fertilisation, C3 plants and C4
plants.
Physiographic
Of, relating to, or employing a description of nature or natural
phenomena.
Phytoplankton
The plant forms of plankton. Phytoplankton are the dominant
plants in the sea, and are the basis of the entire marine food web.
These single-celled organisms are the principal agents of photosynthetic
carbon fixation in the ocean. See also zooplankton.
Plankton
Microscopic aquatic organisms that drift or swim weakly. See
also phytoplankton and zooplankton.
Plant functional type (PFT)
An idealised vegetation class typically used in dynamic global
vegetation models (DGVM).
Polynya
Areas of permanently unfrozen sea water resulting from warmer
local water currents in otherwise sea-ice covered oceans. They
are biological hotspots, since they serve as breathing holes or
refuges for marine mammals such as whales and seals, and fishhunting
birds.
Population system
An ecological system (not ecosystem) determined by the dynamics
of a particular vagile species that typically cuts across
several ecological communities and even entire biomes. An example
is migratory birds that seasonally inhabit forests as well
as grasslands and visit wetlands on their migratory routes.
Appendix I: Glossary

Potential production
Estimated crop productivity under non-limiting soil, nutrient and
water conditions.
Pre-industrial
See industrial revolution.
Primary production
All forms of production accomplished by plants, also called primary
producers. See GPP, NPP, NEP and NBP.
Projection
The potential evolution of a quality or set of quantities, often
computed with the aid of a model. Projections are distinguished
from predictions in order to emphasise that projections involve
assumptions – concerning, for example, future socio-economic
and technological developments, that may or may not be realised
– and are therefore subject to substantial uncertainty. See also
climate projection and climate prediction.
Pteropods
Planktonic, small marine snails with swimming organs resembling
wings.
Pure rate of time preference
The degree to which consumption now is preferred to consumption
one year later, with prices and incomes held constant,
which is one component of the discount rate.
Radiative forcing
Radiative forcing is the change in the net vertical irradiance (expressed
inWatts per square metre;Wm−2) at the tropopause due
to an internal or external change in the forcing of the climate
system, such as a change in the concentration of CO2 or the output
of the Sun.
Rangeland
Unmanaged grasslands, shrublands, savannas and tundra.
Recalcitrant
Recalcitrant organic material or recalcitrant carbon stocks resist
decomposition.
Reference scenario
See baseline/reference.
Reforestation
Planting of forests on lands that have previously contained
forests but that have been converted to some other use. For a
discussion of the term forest and related terms such as afforestation,
reforestation and deforestation, see the IPCC Special
Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry (IPCC,
).
Reid’s paradox
This refers to the apparent contradiction between inferences of
high plant migration rates as suggested in the palaeo-record (particularly
after the last Ice Age), and the low potential rates of
migration that can be inferred through studying the seed dispersal
of the plants involved, e.g., in wind-tunnel experiments.
Reinsurance
The transfer of a portion of primary insurance risks to a secondary
tier of insurers (reinsurers); essentially ‘insurance for insurers’.
Relative sea-level rise
See sea-level rise.
Reservoir
A component of the climate system, other than the atmosphere,
that has the capacity to store, accumulate or release a substance
of concern (e.g., carbon or a greenhouse gas). Oceans, soils, and
forests are examples of carbon reservoirs. The term also means
an artificial or natural storage place for water, such as a lake,
pond or aquifer, from which the water may be withdrawn for
such purposes as irrigation or water supply.
Resilience
The ability of a social or ecological system to absorb disturbances
while retaining the same basic structure and ways of
functioning, the capacity for self-organisation, and the capacity
to adapt to stress and change.
Respiration
The process whereby living organisms convert organic matter
to carbon dioxide, releasing energy and consuming oxygen.
Riparian
Relating to or living or located on the bank of a natural watercourse
(such as a river) or sometimes of a lake or a tidewater.
River discharge
Water flow within a river channel, for example expressed in
m3/s. A synonym for streamflow.
Runoff
That part of precipitation that does not evaporate and is not transpired.
Salinisation
The accumulation of salts in soils.
Salt-water intrusion / encroachment
Displacement of fresh surface water or groundwater by the advance
of salt water due to its greater density. This usually occurs
in coastal and estuarine areas due to reducing land-based
influence (e.g., either from reduced runoff and associated
groundwater recharge, or from excessive water withdrawals
from aquifers) or increasing marine influence (e.g., relative sealevel
rise).
Savanna
Tropical or sub-tropical grassland or woodland biomes with scattered
shrubs, individual trees or a very open canopy of trees, all
characterised by a dry (arid, semi-arid or semi-humid) climate.
Appendix I: Glossary

Scenario
A plausible and often simplified description of how the future
may develop, based on a coherent and internally consistent set
of assumptions about driving forces and key relationships. Scenarios
may be derived from projections, but are often based on
additional information from other sources, sometimes combined
with a ‘narrative storyline’. See also climate (change) scenario,
emissions scenario and SRES.
Sea-ice biome
The biome formed by all marine organisms living within or on
the floating sea ice (frozen sea water) of the polar oceans.)
Sea-level rise
An increase in the mean level of the ocean. Eustatic sea-level
rise is a change in global average sea level brought about by an
increase in the volume of the world ocean. Relative sea-level
rise occurs where there is a local increase in the level of the
ocean relative to the land, which might be due to ocean rise
and/or land level subsidence. In areas subject to rapid land-level
uplift, relative sea level can fall.
Sea wall
A human-made wall or embankment along a shore to prevent
wave erosion.
Semi-arid regions
Regions of moderately low rainfall, which are not highly productive
and are usually classified as rangelands. ‘Moderately
low’ is widely accepted as between 100 and 250 mm precipitation
per year. See also arid region.
Sensitivity
Sensitivity is the degree to which a system is affected, either adversely
or beneficially, by climate variability or change. The effect
may be direct (e.g., a change in crop yield in response to a
change in the mean, range or variability of temperature) or indirect
(e.g., damages caused by an increase in the frequency of
coastal flooding due to sea-level rise).
Sequestration
See carbon sequestration.
Silviculture
Cultivation, development and care of forests.
Sink
Any process, activity, or mechanism that removes a greenhouse
gas, an aerosol, or a precursor of a greenhouse gas or aerosol
from the atmosphere.
Snow water equivalent
The equivalent volume/mass of water that would be produced if
a particular body of snow or ice was melted.
Snowpack
A seasonal accumulation of slow-melting snow.
Social cost of carbon
The value of the climate change impacts from 1 tonne of carbon
emitted today as CO2, aggregated over time and discounted
back to the present day; sometimes also expressed as value per
tonne of carbon dioxide.
Socio-economic scenarios
Scenarios concerning future conditions in terms of population,
Gross Domestic Product and other socio-economic factors relevant
to understanding the implications of climate change. See
SRES (source: Chapter 6).
SRES
The storylines and associated population, GDP and emissions
scenarios associated with the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios
(SRES) (Nakićenović et al., 2000), and the resulting climate
change and sea-level rise scenarios. Four families of
socio-economic scenario (A1, A2, B1 and B2) represent different
world futures in two distinct dimensions: a focus on economic
versus environmental concerns, and global versus
regional development patterns.
Stakeholder
A person or an organisation that has a legitimate interest in a
project or entity, or would be affected by a particular action or
policy.
Stock
See reservoir.
Stratosphere
Highly stratified region of atmosphere above the troposphere
extending from about 10 km (ranging from 9 km in high latitudes
to 16 km in the tropics) to about 50 km.
Streamflow
Water flow within a river channel, for example, expressed in
m3/s. A synonym for river discharge.
Sub-alpine
The biogeographic zone below the tree line and above the montane
zone that is characterised by the presence of coniferous forest
and trees.
Succulent
Succulent plants, e.g., cactuses, possessing organs that store
water, thus facilitating survival during drought conditions.
Surface runoff
The water that travels over the land surface to the nearest surface
stream; runoff of a drainage basin that has not passed beneath the
surface since precipitation.
Sustainable development
Development that meets the cultural, social, political and economic
needs of the present generation without compromising
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.
Appendix I: Glossary

Taiga
The northernmost belt of boreal forest adjacent to theArctic tundra.
Thermal expansion
In connection with sea-level rise, this refers to the increase in
volume (and decrease in density) that results from warming
water. A warming of the ocean leads to an expansion of the
ocean volume and hence an increase in sea level.
Thermocline
The region in the world’s ocean, typically at a depth of 1 km,
where temperature decreases rapidly with depth and which
marks the boundary between the surface and the ocean.
Thermohaline circulation (THC)
Large-scale, density-driven circulation in the ocean, caused by
differences in temperature and salinity. In the NorthAtlantic, the
thermohaline circulation consists of warm surface water flowing
northward and cold deepwater flowing southward, resulting in a
net poleward transport of heat. The surface water sinks in highly
restricted regions located in high latitudes. Also called meridional
overturning circulation (MOC).
Thermokarst
Aragged landscape full of shallow pits, hummocks and depressions
often filled with water (ponds), which results from thawing
of ground ice or permafrost. Thermokarst processes are the
processes driven by warming that lead to the formation of
thermokarst.
Threshold
The level of magnitude of a system process at which sudden or
rapid change occurs. A point or level at which new properties
emerge in an ecological, economic or other system, invalidating
predictions based on mathematical relationships that apply at
lower levels.
Transpiration
The evaporation of water vapour from the surfaces of leaves
through stomata.
Tree line
The upper limit of tree growth in mountains or high latitudes. It
is more elevated or more poleward than the forest line.
Trophic level
The position that an organism occupies in a food chain.
Trophic relationship
The ecological relationship which results when one species feeds
on another.
Troposphere
The lowest part of the atmosphere from the surface to about
km in altitude in mid-latitudes (ranging from 9 km in high
latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on average) where clouds and
‘weather’ phenomena occur. In the troposphere, temperatures
generally decrease with height.
Tsunami
Alarge wave produced by a submarine earthquake, landslide or
volcanic eruption.
Tundra
Atreeless, level, or gently undulating plain characteristic of the
Arctic and sub-Arctic regions characterised by low temperatures
and short growing seasons.
Uncertainty
An expression of the degree to which a value (e.g., the future
state of the climate system) is unknown. Uncertainty can result
from lack of information or from disagreement about what is
known or even knowable. It may have many types of sources,
from quantifiable errors in the data to ambiguously defined concepts
or terminology, or uncertain projections of human behaviour.
Uncertainty can therefore be represented by quantitative
measures (e.g., a range of values calculated by various models)
or by qualitative statements (e.g., reflecting the judgement of a
team of experts). See also confidence and likelihood.
Undernutrition
The temporary or chronic state resulting from intake of lower
than recommended daily dietary energy and/or protein requirements,
through either insufficient food intake, poor absorption,
and/or poor biological use of nutrients consumed.
Ungulate
Ahoofed, typically herbivorous, quadruped mammal (including
ruminants, swine, camel, hippopotamus, horse, rhinoceros and
elephant).
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC)
The Convention was adopted on 9 May 1992, in New York, and
signed at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro by more than
countries and the European Community. Its ultimate objective
is the ‘stabilisation of greenhouse gas concentrations in the
atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic
interference with the climate system’. It contains commitments
for all Parties. Under the Convention, Parties included
inAnnex I aim to return greenhouse gas emissions not controlled
by the Montreal Protocol to 1990 levels by the year 2000. The
Convention entered in force inMarch 1994. See also Kyoto Protocol.
Upwelling region
Aregion of an ocean where cold, typically nutrient-rich watersfrom
the bottom of the ocean surface.
Urbanisation
The conversion of land from a natural state or managed natural
state (such as agriculture) to cities; a process driven by net ruralto-
urban migration through which an increasing percentage of
the population in any nation or region come to live in settlements
that are defined as ‘urban centres’.
Appendix I: Glossary

Appendix I: Glossary

Vagile
Able to migrate.
Vascular plants
Higher plants with vascular, i.e., sap-transporting, tissues.
Vector
A blood-sucking organism, such as an insect, that transmits a
pathogen from one host to another. See also vector-borne diseases.
Vector-borne diseases
Disease that are transmitted between hosts by a vector organism
(such as a mosquito or tick); e.g., malaria, dengue fever and
leishmaniasis.
Vernalisation
The biological requirements of certain crops, such as winter cereals,
which need periods of extreme cold temperatures before
emergence and/or during early vegetative stages, in order to
flower and produce seeds. By extension, the act or process of
hastening the flowering and fruiting of plants by treating seeds,
bulbs or seedlings with cold temperatures, so as to induce a
shortening of the vegetative period.
Vulnerability
Vulnerability is the degree to which a system is susceptible to,
and unable to cope with, adverse effects of climate change, including
climate variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a function
of the character, magnitude, and rate of climate change and
variation to which a system is exposed, its sensitivity, and its
adaptive capacity.
Water consumption
Amount of extracted water irretrievably lost during its use (by
evaporation and goods production).Water consumption is equal
to water withdrawal minus return flow.
Water productivity
The ratio of crop seed produced per unit water applied. In the
case of irrigation, see irrigation water-use efficiency. For rainfed
crops, water productivity is typically 1 t/100 mm.
Water stress
A country is water-stressed if the available freshwater supply
relative to water withdrawals acts as an important constraint on
development. Withdrawals exceeding 20% of renewable water
supply have been used as an indicator of water stress. A crop is
water-stressed if soil-available water, and thus actual evapotranspiration,
is less than potential evapotranspiration demands.
Water-use efficiency
Carbon gain in photosynthesis per unit water lost in evapotranspiration.
It can be expressed on a short-term basis as the ratio
of photosynthetic carbon gain per unit transpirational water loss,
or on a seasonal basis as the ratio of net primary production or
agricultural yield to the amount of available water.
Welfare
An economic term used to describe the state of well-being of
humans on an individual or collective basis. The constituents of
well-being are commonly considered to include materials to satisfy
basic needs, freedom and choice, health, good social relations,
and security.
Wetland
A transitional, regularly waterlogged area of poorly drained
soils, often between an aquatic and a terrestrial ecosystem, fed
from rain, surface water or groundwater. Wetlands are characterised
by a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated
soil conditions.
Yedoma
Ancient organic material trapped in permafrost that is hardly decomposed.
Zoonoses
Diseases and infections which are naturally transmitted between
vertebrate animals and people.
Zooplankton
The animal forms of plankton. They consume phytoplankton or
other zooplankton.


[CO2] Concentration of carbon dioxide
AAO Antarctic Oscillation
ABM Agent-based models
AC Air-conditioning
ACIA Arctic Climate ImpactAssessment
AEJ African Easterly Jet
AEZ Agro-ecological zone
AGCM Atmospheric General Circulation Model
AGO Australian Greenhouse Office
AIACC Assessments of Impacts andAdaptations to
Climate Change in Multiple Regions and
Sectors
AIDS Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
AO Arctic Oscillation
AOGCM Atmosphere-Ocean General Circulation
Model
APF Adaptation Policy Framework
AR4 FourthAssessment Report
Aus Australia
AVHRR Advanced Very High Resolution
Radiometer
BAU Business-as-usual scenario
BSATs Brazilian semi-arid tropics
CAA CanadianArctic archipelago
CAPRADE ComitéAndino para la Prevención y
Atención de Desastres (Andean Committee
for Disaster Prevention andAssistance)
CBA Cost-benefit analysis
CBD Convention on Biological Diversity
CC Climate change
CCAMLR Commission for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources
CCD (United Nations) Convention to Combat
Desertification
CCIAV Climate change impacts, adaptation and
vulnerability
CCN Cloud condensation nuclei
CDF Conditional damage function
CDM Clean Development Mechanism
CEE Central and Eastern Europe
CFP Common Fisheries Policy
CGE Computable general equilibrium (model)
CIESIN Center for International Earth Science
Information Network
CITES Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species ofWild Flora and
Fauna
CMAQ Community multiscale air quality (model)
COP Conference of the Parties (to the
UNFCCC)
CPPS Comisión Permanente del Pacífico Sur
(Permanent Commission of the South
Pacific)
CRID Centro Regional de Información sobre
Desastres (Regional Disaster Information
Centre – LatinAmerica and the Caribbean)
CSIRO Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation
DAC DevelopmentAssistance Committee
DAI Dangerous anthropogenic interference
DALY Disability adjusted life year
DDC Data Distribution Centre (of the IPCC)
Defra Department for Environment, Food and
RuralAffairs (of the UK Government)
DGVM Dynamic global vegetation model
DIC Dissolved inorganic carbon
DJF December, January, February
DMS Dimethyl sulphide
DOC Dissolved organic carbon
DPSIR Drivers-pressures-state-impacts-response
DWC Dialogue onWater and Climate
ECCP European Climate Change Programme
ECLAC Economic Commission for LatinAmerica
and the Caribbean
EF Ecological footprint
EIA Environmental ImpactAssessment
EMIC Earth-system model of intermediate
complexity
ENSO El Niño-Southern Oscillation
EPA Environmental ProtectionAgency
EPOC Environment Policy Committee
EPPA Anthropogenic emission prediction and
policy analysis
Appendix IV: Acronyms
EPPA-HHL The EPPAhigh-emissions scenario
EPPA-LLH The EPPAlow-emissions scenario
ET Evapotranspiration
EU European Union
EU15 The 15 countries in the European Union
before the expansion on 1 May 2004
EU25 The 25 countries in the European Union
after the expansion on 1 May 2004, but
prior to 1 January 2007
EWS Early-warning systems
FACE Free-air carbon dioxide enrichment
FAO Food andAgriculture Organization
FFF Food, fibre and forestry
FFFF Food, fibre, forestry and fishery
GBR Great Barrier Reef
GCM General Circulation Model
GDP Gross domestic product
GEF Global Environment Facility
GEOSS Global Earth Observation System of
Systems
GHG Greenhouse gas(es)
GIMMS Global Inventory Modeling and Mapping
Studies
GIS Geographic information system
GISS Goddard Institute for Space Studies
GLOF Glacial lake outburst flood
GMAT Global mean annual temperature
GMT Global mean temperature
GNP Gross national product
GPP Gross primary production
GPS Global Positioning System
GWP GlobalWater Partnership
HABs Harmful algal blooms
HANPP Human appropriation of net primary
productivity
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus
HPS Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome
HYV High-yield varieties
IAM Integrated assessment model
IAS Invasive alien species
ICLIPS IntegratedAssessment of Climate
Protection Strategies
ICM Integrated coastal management
ICZM Integrated coastal zone management
IFRCRC International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies
IGBP International Geosphere-Biosphere
Programme
IHDP International Human Dimensions
Programme
IIASA International Institute forApplied Systems
Analysis
INAP Integrated National PilotAdaptation Plan
IOCARIBE-GOOS Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission Regional Sub-Commission
for the Caribbean andAdjacent Regions
Global Ocean Observing System
IOD Indian Ocean Dipole
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change
IPO Inter-decadal Pacific Oscillation
IRRI International Rice Research Institute
ITCZ Intertropical Convergence Zone
ITTO International Tropical Timber Organization
IUCN International Union for the Conservation of
Nature and Natural Resources (World
Conservation Union)
JFM January, February, March
JJA June, July,August
LA LatinAmerica
LAI Leaf-area index
LBA Large Scale Biosphere-Atmosphere
(experiment)
LDC Less/Least Developed Countries
LGA Local government authority (Chapter 11)
LGM Last Glacial Maximum
LGP Length of growing period
LIA Little IceAge
LPJ Lund-Potsdam-Jena (model)
LULUCF Land use, land-use change and forestry
M&E Monitoring and evaluation
MA Millennium EcosystemAssessment
MACC MainstreamingAdaptation to Climate
Change in the Caribbean
MAMJ March,April, May, June
MARA/ARMA Mapping Malaria Risk inAfrica/Atlas du
Risque de la Malaria enAfrique
MASL Metres above sea level
MDB Murray-Darling Basin
MDGs Millennium Development Goals
MEA Multilateral environmental agreement
MER Market exchange rates
MJO Madden-Julian Oscillation
MOC Meridional overturning circulation
MTE Mediterranean-type ecosystems
NAH NorthAtlantic Sub-tropical High
NAO NorthAtlantic Oscillation
NAPA NationalAdaptation Programme ofAction
NBP Net biome productivity
NC National Communication
NCAR PCM National Center forAtmospheric Research
Parallel Climate Model
NDVI Normalised Difference Vegetation Index
NEP Net ecosystem productivity
NEPAD New Partnership forAfrica’s Development
NGO Non-governmental organisation
Appendix IV: Acronyms

NHT Northern Hemisphere temperature
NPP Net primary productivity
NSW New SouthWales
NT Northern Territory
NTFP Non-timber forest products
NWMP NationalWater Management Plan
NZ New Zealand
ODA Official DevelopmentAssistance
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development
OND October, November, December
PAHO Pan-American Health Organization
PAL PathfinderAVHRR Land
PDF Probability density function
PDI Power dissipation index
PDO Pacific Decadal Oscillation
PDSI Palmer Drought Severity Index
P-E Precipitation-evaporation
PEAC Pacific ENSOApplications Center
PFT Plant functional types
PIA Participatory integrated assessment
PI-GCOS Pacific Islands Global Climate Observing
System
P-IND Pre-industrial
PM Particulate matter
ppb Parts per billion
ppm Parts per million
PPP Purchasing power parity
PRA Participatory rural appraisal
Qld Queensland
RCM Regional Climate Model
RRA Rapid rural appraisal
RSLR Relative sea-level rise
SACZ SouthAtlantic Convergence Zone
SAP Structural adjustment programme
SAS Storyline and simulation
SBW Spruce bud worm
SCAPE Soft Cliff and Platform Erosion (model)
SD Statistical downscaling
SDSM Statistical downscaling model
SEAFRAME Sea-level fine resolution acoustic
measuring equipment
SIDS Small Island Developing States
SLR Sea-level rise
SM Supplementary material
SoCAB South CoastAir Basin (California)
SON September, October, November
SPCZ South Pacific Convergence Zone
SRES Special Report on Emissions Scenarios
SST Sea surface temperature
SWE Snow water equivalent
TAR ThirdAssessment Report (of the IPCC)
TBE Tick-borne encephalitis
TEJ Tropical Easterly Jet
TEK Traditional ecological knowledge
TGICA Task Group on Data and Scenario Support
for Impact and ClimateAnalysis
THC Thermohaline circulation
TOGA Tropical Ocean-GlobalAtmosphere
TOPEX Ocean Topography Experiment
TWA Tolerable windows approach
UHI Urban heat-island
UK United Kingdom
UKCIP United Kingdom Climate Impacts
Programme
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change
US United States (ofAmerica)
USEPA United States Environmental Protection
Agency
UVR Ultraviolet radiation
VBD Vector-borne disease
VOC Volatile organic compound
WA WesternAustralia
WAIS WestAntarctic ice sheet
WAMU WestAfrican Monetary Union
WBD Water-borne disease
WCRP World Climate Research Programme
WE Western Europe
WG Working Group (of the IPCC)
WHO World Health Organization
WMO World Meteorological Organization
WNV West Nile virus
WTO World Trade Organization
WWW WorldWeatherWatch
