Annex II
Glossary
Absorption (Refrigeration)
A process by which a material (the absorbent) extracts one or
more substances (absorbates) from a liquid or gaseous medium
that it is in contact with and changes chemically, physically
or both. The process is accompanied by a change in entropy,
which makes it a useful mechanism for a refrigeration cycle.
Water-lithium bromine and ammonia-water →chillers are examples
of absorption chillers.
Adjustment Time
See: →Lifetime in relation to atmospheric concentrations, or →
response time in relation to the climate system.
Aerosol
A suspension of very fine solid or liquid particles in a gas.
Aerosol is also used as a common name for a spray (or ‘aerosol’)
can, in which a container is filled with a product and a
propellant and is pressurized so as to release the product in a
fine spray.
Age of Air
The length of time that a stratospheric air mass has been out of
contact with the well-mixed →troposphere. The content of a
unit element of air at a particular location and particular time
of year in the →stratosphere can be thought of as a mixture of
different air parcels that have taken different routes from the →
tropopause to arrive at that location. The mean age of air at a
specific location is defined as the average transit times of the
elements since their last contact with the tropopause.
Alcohols
→Hydrocarbon derivatives in which at least one hydrogen atom
has been replaced by an -OH group. Alcohols are sometimes
used as solvents.
Annex B Countries/Parties (Kyoto Protocol)
The group of countries included in Annex B in the →Kyoto
Protocol that have agreed to a target for their →greenhouse-gas
emissions. It includes all the →Annex I countries (as amended
in 1998) except Turkey and Belarus. See also: →Non-Annex I
countries/parties.
Annex I Countries/Parties (Climate Convention)
The group of countries included in Annex I (as amended in 1998)
to the →United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC). It includes all the developed countries in
the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), and →countries with economies in transition. By
default, the other countries are referred to as →Non-Annex I
countries. See also: →Annex B countries/parties.
Anthropogenic
Resulting from or produced by human beings.
Aqueous Cleaning
Cleaning parts of equipment with water, to which may be added
suitable detergents, saponifiers or other additives.
Article 5(1) Countries (Montreal Protocol)
Developing countries that are →Party to the →Montreal
Protocol. These countries are permitted a ten-year grace period
in the phase-out schedule in the →Montreal Protocol compared
with developed countries.
Note: The definitions in this glossary refer to the use of the terms in the context of this report. A ‘→’ indicates that the following
term is also contained in this glossary. The glossary provides an explanation of specific terms as the lead authors intend them to
be interpreted in this report.
450 IPCC/TEAP Special Report: Safeguarding the Ozone Layer and the Global Climate System
Atmosphere
The gaseous envelope surrounding the Earth. The dry atmosphere
consists almost entirely of nitrogen (N2) (78.1% volume
→mixing ratio) and oxygen (O2) (20.9% volume mixing ratio).
The remaining 1% consists of trace gases, such as argon (Ar)
(0.93% volume mixing ratio), helium (He), and radiatively
active →greenhouse gases such as →carbon dioxide (CO2)
(0.037% volume mixing ratio in 2004) and →ozone (O3). In addition,
the atmosphere contains water vapour, whose amount is
highly variable, clouds and both liquid and particulate aerosols.
Most of the matter in the atmosphere occurs in the →troposphere
immediately above the Earth’s surface and the overlying
→stratosphere.
Atmospheric Lifetime
A measure of the average time that a molecule remains intact
once released into the →atmosphere. See also: →Lifetime.
Azeotrope (Refrigeration)
A →blend consisting of one or more →refrigerants of different
volatilities that does not appreciably change in composition or
temperature as it evaporates (boils) or condenses (liquefies) under
constant pressure. Refrigerant blends assigned an R-500 series
number designation by ANSI/ASHRAE 34 are azeotropes.
Compare with: →Zeotrope.
Banks
Banks are the total amount of substances contained in existing
equipment, chemical stockpiles, foams and other products not
yet released to the atmosphere.
Baseline
A non-intervention →scenario used as a base in the analysis of
intervention scenarios. See also: →Business-As-usual (BAU)
Scenario.
Best Practice
For this Report, best practice is considered the lowest achievable
value of halocarbon emission at a given date, using commercially
proven technologies in the production, use, substitution,
recovery and destruction of halocarbon or halocarbon-based
products.
Blends/Mixtures (Refrigeration)
A mixture of two or more pure fluids. Blends are used to achieve
properties that fit many refrigeration purposes. For example, a
mixture of flammable and nonflammable components can result
in a nonflammable blend. Blends can be divided into three
categories: →azeotropic, →non-azeotropic and near-azeotropic
blends.
Blowing Agent (Foams)
A gas, volatile liquid or chemical that generates gas during the
foaming process. The gas creates bubbles or cells in the plastic
structure of a foam.
Bottom-Up Models
A modelling approach that aggregates information from diverse
sources, often including technological and engineering details
in the analysis. Compare with: →Top-down models.
Business-As-Usual (BAU) Scenario (2015, This Report)
A →baseline scenario for the use of →halocarbons and their
alternatives, which assumes that all existing regulation and →
phase-out measures, including the →Montreal Protocol and relevant
national regulations, continue to 2015. The usual practices
(including end-of-life recovery) and emission rates are kept
unchanged up to 2015.
Capital Costs
Costs associated with capital or investment expenditure on land,
plant, equipment and inventories. Unlike labour and operating
costs, capital costs are independent of the level of output for a
given capacity of production.
Carbon Dioxide (CO2)
A naturally occurring gas which occurs as a byproduct of burning
→fossil fuels and biomass, as well as other industrial processes
and land-use changes. It is the principal →anthropogenic
→greenhouse gas that affects the Earth’s radiative balance and
is the reference gas against which other greenhouse gases are
generally measured.
Catalyst
A chemical that acts to speed up or facilitate a chemical reaction,
but is not physically changed or used up in the reaction.
Chiller
A cooling system that removes heat from one medium (water)
and deposits it into another (ambient air or water).
Chlorine Loading
The total amount of chlorine (generally expressed as a →mixing
ratio, or fraction of all air molecules), accounting for the
amount of all chlorine-bearing substances and the number of
atoms of chlorine in each substance.
Chlorocarbons
→Halocarbons containing carbon and chlorine atoms, but no
other →halogen atoms.
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
→Halocarbons containing only chlorine, fluorine and carbon
atoms. CFCs are both →ozone-depleting substances (ODSs)
and →greenhouse gases.
Class A Fire (Fire Protection)
Fire in ordinary combustible materials, such as wood, cloth, paper,
rubber and many plastics.
Annex II: Glossary 451
Class B Fire (Fire Protection)
Fire in flammable liquids, oils, greases, tars, oil-base paints,
lacquers and flammable gases.
Class C Fire (Fire Protection)
Fire that involves energized electrical equipment where the electrical
resistivity of the extinguishing media is of importance.
Clean Agent (Fire Protection)
An electrically non-conducting, volatile or gaseous fire-extinguishing
agent that does not leave a residue upon evaporation.
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)
Defined in Article 12 of the →Kyoto Protocol, the Clean
Development Mechanism is intended to meet two objectives:
(1) to assist →non-Annex I Parties in achieving sustainable development
and in contributing to the ultimate objective of the
convention; and (2) to assist →Annex I Parties in achieving
compliance with their quantified emission limitation and reduction
commitments. Certified emission reductions from Clean
Development Mechanism projects undertaken in non-Annex I
countries that limit or reduce →greenhouse-gas emissions, when
certified by operational entities designated by the→Conference
of the Parties/Meeting of the Parties, can be accrued to the investor
(government or industry) from Parties in →Annex B. A
share of the proceeds from the certified project activities is used
to cover administrative expenses as well as to assist developing
country Parties that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse
effects of →climate change to meet the costs of adaptation.
Climate
Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the ‘average
weather’, or more rigorously, as the statistical description in
terms of the mean and variability of relevant quantities over a
period of time ranging from months to thousands or millions
of years. The classical period is 30 years, as defined by the →
World Meteorological Organization (WMO). These quantities
are most often surface variables such as temperature, precipitation,
and wind. Climate in a wider sense is the state, including a
statistical description, of the climate system.
Climate Change
Climate change refers to a statistically significant variation in
either the mean state of the →climate or in its variability, persisting
for an extended period (typically decades or longer).
Climate change may be due to natural internal processes or external
forcings, or to persistent →anthropogenic changes in the
composition of the atmosphere or in land use.
Note that Article 1 of the →Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) defines ‘climate change’ as ‘a
change of climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to
human activity that alters the composition of the global atmosphere
and which is in addition to natural climate variability,
observed over comparable time periods’. The UNFCCC thus
makes a distinction between ‘climate change’ attributable to human
activities altering the atmospheric composition, and ‘climate
variability’ attributable to natural causes.
Climate Feedback
An interaction mechanism between processes in the →climate
system occurring when the result of an initial process triggers
changes in a second process that in turn influences the initial
one. A positive feedback intensifies the original process, whereas
a negative feedback weakens it.
Climate Scenario
A plausible and often simplified representation of the future
climate, based on a coherent and internally consistent set of
driving forces and key relations, that has been constructed for
use in investigating the potential consequences of →anthropogenic
→climate change, and often serves as input to impact
models. Climate →projections often serve as the raw material
for constructing climate scenarios, but climate scenarios usually
require additional information, such as the baseline current
climate. A climate-change scenario is the difference between a
climate scenario and the current climate.
Climate Sensitivity
In IPCC Reports, equilibrium climate sensitivity refers to the
equilibrium change in global mean surface temperature following
a doubling of the atmospheric (→equivalent) →carbon
dioxide (CO2) concentrations. More generally, equilibrium climate
sensitivity refers to the equilibrium change in surface air
temperature following a unit change in →radiative forcing (in
units of °C per (W m–2)).
In practice, the evaluation of the equilibrium climate sensitivity
requires very long simulations with coupled general
circulation models. The effective climate sensitivity is a related
measure that circumvents this requirement. It is evaluated from
model output for evolving non-equilibrium conditions. It is a
measure of the strengths of the →feedbacks at a particular time
and may vary with forcing history and climate state.
Climate System
The highly complex system that consists of five major components:
the →atmosphere, the hydrosphere, the cryosphere, the
land surface and the biosphere, as well as of the interactions
between them. The climate system evolves over time under the
influence of its own internal dynamics and because of external
forcings, such as volcanic eruptions, solar variations and human-
induced forcings (such as the changing composition of the
atmosphere and land-use change).
Climate Variability
Variations in the mean state and other statistics (such as the
standard deviation and the occurrence of extremes) of the →
climate on all temporal and spatial scales beyond that of individual
weather events. Climate variability may be caused by
natural internal processes within the →climate system (internal
variability), or by variations in natural or anthropogenic external
forcings (external variability). See also: →Climate change.
452 IPCC/TEAP Special Report: Safeguarding the Ozone Layer and the Global Climate System
CO2-Equivalent
The amount of →carbon dioxide (CO2) that would cause the
same amount of →radiative forcing as a given amount of another
→greenhouse gas. When used with concentrations this refers
to the instantaneous radiative forcing caused by the greenhouse
gas or the equivalent amount of CO2. When used with emissions
this refers to the time-integrated radiative forcing over a
specified time horizon caused by the change in concentration
produced by the emissions. See also: →Global warming potential.
Coefficient of Performance (COP) (Refrigeration)
A measure of the energy efficiency of a refrigerating system.
It is defined as the ratio between the refrigerating capacity and
the electric power consumed by the system. The COP is primarily
dependant on the working cycle and the temperature levels
(evaporating/condensing temperature) as well as on the properties
of the →refrigerant, system design and size.
Column Ozone
The total amount of →ozone in a vertical column above the
Earth’s surface. Column ozone is measured in →Dobson units
(DU).
Commercialization
A sequence of actions necessary to achieve market entry and
general market competitiveness of new technologies, processes
and products.
Compressor Discharge Temperature (Refrigeration)
The temperature of a gas at the high-pressure outlet from the
compressor (superheated gas). The gas temperature is typically
30°C to 40°C higher than the condensing temperature at saturation
pressure, mainly depending on the evaporating/condensing
temperature, →refrigerant properties and the compressor
energy efficiency.
Conference of the Parties (COP) (Climate Convention)
The supreme body of the →United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), comprising countries
that have ratified or acceded to the UNFCCC. See also: →
Conference of the Parties/Meeting of the Parties and →Meeting
of the Parties.
Conference of the Parties/Meeting of the Parties (COP/
MOP) (Climate Convention)
The →Conference of the Parties of the →United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) will
serve as the →Meeting of the Parties (MOP), the supreme body
of the →Kyoto Protocol, but only Parties to the Kyoto Protocol
may participate in deliberations and make decisions.
Containment (Refrigeration)
The application of service techniques or special equipment designed
to preclude or reduce loss of →refrigerant from equipment
during installation, operation, service or disposal of refrigeration
and air-conditioning equipment.
Controlled Substance
Under the →Montreal Protocol, any →ozone-depleting substance
(ODS) that is subject to control measures, such as a →
phase-out requirement.
Cost Effective
A criterion that specifies that a technology or measure delivers
a good or service at equal or lower cost than current practice, or
the least-cost alternative for the achievement of a given target.
Countries with Economies in Transition (CEITs)
Countries with national economies in the process of changing
from a planned economic system to a market economy.
Destruction
Destruction of →ozone-depleting substances (ODSs) by approved
destruction plants, in order to avoid their emissions.
Detergent
A product designed to render, for example, oils and greases
soluble in water; usually made from synthetic →surfactants.
Dobson Unit (DU)
A unit to measure total →column ozone. The number of Dobson
units is the thickness, in units of 10–5 m, that the ozone column
would occupy if compressed into a layer of uniform density at
a pressure of 1013 hPa and a temperature of 0°C. One DU corresponds
to a column of ozone containing 2.69 × 1020 molecules
per square meter. Although column ozone can vary greatly, 300
DU is a typical value.
Drop-In Replacement (Refrigeration)
The procedure for replacing →CFC refrigerants with non-CFC
refrigerants in existing refrigerating, air-conditioning and heatpump
plants without doing any plant modifications. However,
drop-in procedures are normally referred to as →retrofitting because
plants need minor modifications, such as the change of
lubricant, and the replacement of the expansion device and the
desiccant material.
Dry Powder Inhaler (DPI) (Medical Aerosols)
An alternate technology to →metered dose inhalers (MDIs) that
can be used if the medication being dispensed can be satisfactorily
formulated as microfine powder, thus eliminating the use
of a chemical propellant.
Emission Factor
The coefficient that relates actual →emissions to activity data
as a standard rate of emission per unit of activity.
Emissions
The release of gases or →aerosols into the →atmosphere over a
specified area and period of time.
Annex II: Glossary 453
Emission Scenario
A plausible representation of the future development of →emissions
of substances that are potentially radiatively active (e.g.,
→greenhouse gases and →aerosols), based on a coherent and
internally consistent set of assumptions about driving forces
(such as demographic and socio-economic development, and
technological change) and their key relationships. See also: →
Scenario (generic) and →climate scenario.
The IPCC Special Report on Emission Scenarios (2000)
presented emission scenarios, known as the →SRES scenarios,
which have been used as a basis for the climate projections in
the IPCC Third Assessment Report (2001) and in this report.
Energy Balance
Averaged over the globe and over long time periods, the energy
budget of the →climate system must be in balance. Because the
climate system derives all its energy from the Sun, this balance
implies that, globally, the amount of incoming →solar radiation
must on average be equal to the sum of the outgoing reflected
solar radiation and the outgoing →thermal infrared radiation
emitted by the climate system. A perturbation of this global radiation
balance, be it →anthropogenic or natural, is called →
radiative forcing.
Equivalent-CO2
See →CO2-Equivalent.
Equivalent Effective Stratospheric Chlorine (EESC)
An index of the amount of chlorine (Cl) and bromine (Br) that is
present in the →stratosphere in forms that can contribute to the
depletion of →ozone. The EESC value takes into account different
fractional releases of chlorine or bromine from different
halocarbons and the much higher efficiency of bromine in the
catalytic removal of ozone. See also: →Chlorine loading.
Ethers
Organic compounds with formula R-O-R, where O is an oxygen
atom and R is not a hydrogen atom (H).
Expansion Control Devices (Refrigeration)
A device, such as an expansion valve, expansion orifice, turbine
or capillary tube, that is used to control the mass flow of a →
refrigerant from the high-pressure side to the low-pressure side
of a refrigeration system.
External Costs
The costs arising from any human activity when the agent responsible
for the activity does not take full account of the negative
impacts on others of his or her actions. Similarly, when
the impacts are positive and not accounted for in the actions of
the agent responsible, they are referred to as external benefits.
Emissions of particulate pollution from an industrial installation
affect the health of people in the vicinity, but this is not
often considered, or is given inadequate weight, in private decision
making and there is no market for such impacts. Such
a phenomenon is referred to as an externality, and the costs it
imposes are referred to as the external costs.
External Forcing
See: →Climate system.
Externality
See: →External costs.
Feedback
See: →Climate feedback.
Fluorinated Ethers
→Ethers in which one or more hydrogen atoms have been replaced
by fluorine.
Fluorocarbons
→Halocarbons containing fluorine atoms, including →chlorofluorocarbons
(CFCs), →hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs),
→hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), and →perfluorocarbons
(PFCs).
Fluoroketones (FKs)
Organic compounds in which two fully fluorinated alkyl
groups are attached to a carbonyl group (C=O).
Fossil Fuels
Carbon-based fuels derived from geological (fossil) carbon deposits.
Examples include coal, oil and natural gas.
Framework Convention on Climate Change
See:→United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC).
Global Warming Potential (GWP)
An index comparing the climate impact of an emission of a
greenhouse gas relative to that of emitting the same amount of
→carbon dioxide. GWPs are determined as the ratio of the timeintegrated
→radiative forcing arising from a pulse emission of
1 kg of a substance relative to that of 1 kg of carbon dioxide,
over a fixed time horizon. See also: →Radiative forcing.
Greenhouse Effect
→Greenhouse gases in the →atmosphere effectively absorb the
→thermal infrared radiation that is emitted by the Earth’s surface,
by the atmosphere itself, and by clouds. The atmosphere
emits radiation in all directions, including downward to the
Earth’s surface. Greenhouse gases trap heat within the surfacetroposphere
system and raise the temperature of the Earth’s surface.
This is called the natural greenhouse effect.
An increase in the concentration of greenhouse gases leads to
increased absorption of infrared radiation and causes a →radiative
forcing, or energy imbalance, that is compensated for by an
increase in the temperature of the surface-troposphere system.
This is the enhanced greenhouse effect.
454 IPCC/TEAP Special Report: Safeguarding the Ozone Layer and the Global Climate System
Greenhouse Gases (GHGs)
The gaseous constituents of the →atmosphere, both natural and
→anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation within the spectrum
of the →thermal infrared radiation that is emitted by the
Earth’s surface, by the atmosphere and by clouds. This property
causes the →greenhouse effect. The primary greenhouse gases
in the Earth’s atmosphere are water vapour (H2O), →carbon dioxide
(CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4) and →ozone
(O3). Moreover, there are a number of entirely →anthropogenic
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, such as the →halocarbons
and other chlorine- and bromine-containing substances that are
covered by the →Montreal Protocol. Some other trace gases,
such as sulphur hexafluoride (SF6), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs),
and perfluorocarbons (PFCs), are also greenhouse gases.
Halocarbons
Chemical compounds containing carbon atoms, and one or
more atoms of the →halogens chlorine (Cl), fluorine (F), bromine
(Br) or iodine (I). Fully halogenated halocarbons contain
only carbon and halogen atoms, whereas partially halogenated
halocarbons also contain hydrogen (H) atoms. Halocarbons
that release chlorine, bromine or iodine into the →stratosphere
cause →ozone depletion. Halocarbons are also →greenhouse
gases. Halocarbons include →chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs),
→hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), →hydrofluorocarbons
(HFCs), →perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and →halons.
Halogens
A family of chemical elements with similar chemical properties
that includes fluorine (F), chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br) and
iodine (I).
Halons
Fully halogenated →halocarbons that contain bromine and fluorine
atoms.
Hermetic
An airtight sealed system.
Hermetic Compressors (Refrigeration)
Compressors whose motors are sealed within the →refrigerant
loop and are often cooled by the flow of the →refrigerant-lubricant
mixture directly over the motor windings.
Hydrocarbons (HCs)
Chemical compounds consisting of one or more carbon atoms
surrounded only by hydrogen atoms.
Hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs)
→Halocarbons containing only hydrogen, chlorine, fluorine and
carbon atoms. Because HCFCs contain chlorine, they contribute
to →ozone depletion. They are also →greenhouse gases.
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)
→Halocarbons containing only carbon, hydrogen and fluorine
atoms. Because HFCs contain no chlorine, bromine or iodine,
they do not deplete the →ozone layer. Like other halocarbons
they are potent →greenhouse gases.
Hydrofluoroethers (HFEs)
Chemicals composed of hydrogen, fluorine and →ether, which
have similar performance characteristics to certain →ozone-depleting
substances (ODSs) that are used as solvents.
Implementation Costs
Costs involved in the implementation of →mitigation options.
These costs are associated with the necessary institutional
changes, information requirements, market size, opportunities
for technology gain and learning, and economic incentives
(grants, subsidies and taxes).
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was
jointly established by the →World Meteorological Organization
(WMO) and the →United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) in 1988 to assess scientific, technical and socio-economic
information relevant for the understanding of climate
change, its potential impacts and options for adaptation and
mitigation. It is open to all Members of the UN and of WMO.
The IPCC provides, on request, scientific, technical and socioeconomic
advice to the →Conference of the Parties (COP) to the
→United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC). The IPCC has produced a series of Assessment
Reports, Special Reports, Technical Papers, methodologies,
and other products that have become standard works of reference
and that are widely used by policymakers, scientists, and
other experts.
Kyoto Protocol
The Kyoto Protocol to the →United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was adopted at the
Third Session of the →Conference of the Parties (COP) to the
UNFCCC in 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. It contains legally binding
commitments, in addition to those included in the UNFCCC.
Countries included in →Annex B of the Protocol (most OECD
countries and →countries with economies in transition) agreed
to reduce their →anthropogenic →greenhouse-gas emissions
(specifically →carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous
oxide (N2O), →hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), →perfluorocarbons
(PFCs) and sulfur hexafluoride (SF6)) by at least 5% below
1990 levels in the commitment period 2008 to 2012. The
Kyoto Protocol entered into force on 16 February 2005.
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA)
An assessment of the overall environmental impact of a product
over its entire life cycle (manufacture, use and recycling or
disposal).
Life Cycle Climate Performance (LCCP)
A measure of the overall global-warming impact of equipment
based on the total related →emissions of →greenhouse gases
over its entire life cycle. LCCP is an extension of the →total
Annex II: Glossary 455
equivalent warming impact (TEWI). LCCP also takes into account
the direct fugitive emissions arising during manufacture,
and the greenhouse gas emissions associated with their embodied
energy.
Lifetime
Lifetime is a general term used for various time scales characterizing
the rates of processes affecting the concentration of
trace gases. The following lifetimes may be distinguished:
Turnover time (T) is the ratio of the mass (M) of a reservoir
(e.g., a gaseous compound in the →atmosphere) and the total
rate of removal (S) from the reservoir: T = M/S. Separate turnover
times can be defined for each removal process.
Adjustment time or response time (Ta) is a time scale characterizing
the decay of an instantaneous pulse input into the reservoir.
The term adjustment time is also used to characterize the
adjustment of the mass of a reservoir following a step change in
the source strength. Half-life or decay constant is used to quantify
a first-order exponential decay process. See: →Response
time, for a different definition pertinent to climate variations.
The term lifetime is sometimes used, for simplicity, as a surrogate
for adjustment time.
In simple cases, such as CFC-11, where the global removal
rate of the compound is proportional to the total mass of the
reservoir, the adjustment time equals the turnover time: T = Ta.
In more complex cases removal rates are not proportional to the
reservoir mass – for example because of feedback effects – and
this equality no longer holds.
Longwave Radiation
See: →Thermal infrared radiation.
Lower Flammability Limit (LFL)
‘The minimum concentration of a combustible substance that is
capable of propagating a flame through a homogeneous mixture
of the combustible and gaseous oxidizer under the specified
conditions of test’ (ASTM Standard E 681-85). The conditions
of test usually reported for →refrigerants are in dry air in ambient
temperature and pressure.
Lubricant
Typically a substance introduced between moving surfaces to
reduce the friction and wear between them.
Materials Safety Data Sheet (MSDS)
A safety advisory bulletin prepared by chemical producers for a
specific →refrigerant or compound.
Meeting of the Parties (to the Kyoto Protocol) (MOP)
→Conference of the Parties to the →United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change serving as the Meeting of the
Parties (MOP) to the →Kyoto Protocol. It is the supreme body
of the Kyoto Protocol. See also: →Conference of the Parties/
Meeting of the parties (COP/MOP).
Meeting of the Parties (to the Montreal Protocol) (MOP)
The supreme body of the Montreal Protocol.
Metered Dose Inhalers (MDIs) (Medical Aerosols)
A method of dispensing inhaled pulmonary drugs. See also: →
Dry powder inhaler (DPI).
Miscible
The ability of two liquids or gases to uniformly dissolve into
each other. Immiscible liquids will separate into two distinguishable
layers.
Mitigation
A human intervention to reduce the sources or enhance the sinks
of →greenhouse gases.
Mixing Ratio
Mixing ratio, or mole fraction, is the ratio of the number of
moles of a constituent in a given volume to the total number of
moles of all constituents in that volume. It is usually reported
for dry air. Typical values for long-lived →greenhouse gases
range from μmol/mol (parts per million: ppm), nmol/mol (parts
per billion: ppb), to fmol/mol (parts per trillion: ppt). Correcting
the mixing ratio for the non-ideality of gases gives the volume
mixing ratio (sometimes expressed in ppmv, etc.).
Mole Fraction
See: →Mixing ratio
Montreal Protocol
The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone
Layer was adopted in Montreal in 1987 and subsequently adjusted
and amended in London (1990), Copenhagen (1992),
Vienna (1995), Montreal (1997) and Beijing (1999). It controls
the consumption and production of chlorine- and bromine-containing
chemicals (known as →ozone-depleting substances,
ODSs) that destroy the stratospheric →ozone layer.
Multilateral Fund
Part of the financial mechanism under the →Montreal Protocol,
established by the →Parties to provide financial and technical
assistance to →Article 5 Parties.
Non-Annex I Parties/Countries (Climate Convention)
The countries that have ratified or acceded to the →United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
that are not included in →Annex I of the Climate Convention.
Non-Azeotropic (Refrigeration)
A →blend or mixture where the compositions of coexisting liquid
and vapour differ and condensation and evaporation occur
over a range of temperatures. This effect can in some applications
give improved performance in plants with heating/cooling
demand with gliding temperatures. Heating of hot tap water is
one example. Equipment has to be modified to use a non-azeotropic
blend. See also: →zeotropic, →azeotropic.
456 IPCC/TEAP Special Report: Safeguarding the Ozone Layer and the Global Climate System
Non-Condensable Gases (Refrigeration)
Gases with very low temperature boiling points, which are not
easily condensed. Nitrogen and oxygen are the most common
ones found in →chillers.
Nonlinearity
A process is called ‘nonlinear’ when there is no simple proportional
relation between cause and effect. The →climate system
contains many nonlinear processes, resulting in a system with
potentially very complex behaviour. Such complexity may lead
to rapid climate change.
Normal Boiling Point (NBP)
The boiling point of a compound at atmospheric pressure (1013
hPa).
Not-in-Kind Technologies (NIK)
Not-in-kind technologies achieve the same product objective
without the use of →halocarbons, typically with an alternative
approach or unconventional technique. Examples include the
use of stick or spray pump deodorants to replace CFC-12 aerosol
deodorants; the use of mineral wool to replace CFC, HFC
or HCFC insulating foam; and the use of dry powder inhalers
(DPIs) to replace CFC or HFC metered dose inhalers (MDIs).
One-Component Foam (OCF)
A foam in which the →blowing agent acts both as a frothing
agent and as a propellant. These foams are primarily used for
gap filling (to prevent air infiltration) rather than for thermal insulation
per se. As such the use of blowing agent is fully emissive.
Open Drive (Refrigeration)
A compressor drive motor that is outside the →refrigerant loop
and therefore not directly exposed to the circulating refrigerant.
Ozone
The triatomic form of oxygen (O3), which is a gaseous →atmospheric
constituent. In the →troposphere it is created by
photochemical reactions involving gases occurring naturally
and resulting from →anthropogenic activities (→‘smog’).
Tropospheric ozone acts as a →greenhouse gas. In the →stratosphere
ozone is created by the interaction between solar →
ultraviolet radiation and molecular oxygen (O2). Stratospheric
ozone plays a major role in the stratospheric radiative balance.
Its concentration is highest in the →ozone layer.
Ozone-Depleting Substances (ODSs)
Substances known to deplete the stratospheric →ozone layer.
The ODSs controlled under the →Montreal Protocol and its
Amendments are →chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), →hydrochlorofluorocarbons
(HCFCs), →halons, methyl bromide (CH3Br),
carbon tetrachloride (CCl4), methyl chloroform (CH3CCl3),
hydrobromofluorocarbons (HBFCs) and bromochloromethane
(CH2BrCl).
Ozone Depletion
Accelerated chemical destruction of the stratospheric →ozone
layer by the presence of substances produced by human activities.
Ozone Depletion Potential (ODP)
A relative index indicating the extent to which a chemical product
may cause →ozone depletion compared with the depletion
caused by CFC-11. Specifically, the ODP of an →ozone-depleting
substance (ODS) is defined as the integrated change in total
ozone per unit mass emission of that substance relative to
the integrated change in total ozone per unit mass emission of
CFC-11.
Ozone Layer
The layer in the →stratosphere where the concentration of →
ozone is greatest. The layer extends from about 12 to 40 km.
This layer is being depleted by →anthropogenic emissions
of chlorine and bromine compounds. Every year, during the
Southern Hemisphere spring, a very strong depletion of the
ozone layer takes place over the Antarctic region. This depletion
is caused by anthropogenic chlorine and bromine compounds in
combination with the specific meteorological conditions of that
region. This phenomenon is called the Antarctic ozone hole.
Party
A country that signs and/or ratifies an international legal instrument
(e.g., a protocol or an amendment to a protocol), indicating
that it agrees to be bound by the rules set out therein. Parties
to the →Montreal Protocol or →Kyoto Protocol are countries
that have signed and ratified these Protocols.
Perfluorocarbons (PFCs)
Synthetically produced →halocarbons containing only carbon
and fluorine atoms. They are characterized by extreme stability,
non-flammability, low toxicity, zero →ozone depleting potential
and high →global warming potential.
Phase-Out
The ending of all production and consumption of a chemical
controlled under the →Montreal Protocol.
Phase-Out Plan
The part of the Country Programme under the →Montreal
Protocol that describes the strategy statement of a government
defining the →phase-out time schedule for each controlled substance
and the government actions to be taken for achieving
phase-out. It contains a prioritized list of projects to be undertaken
and takes into account the specific industrial, political and
legislative situation in the country.
Polar Stratospheric Clouds (PSCs)
A class of clouds composed of particles, including nitric acid
hydrates and ice, that occur at high altitudes (of about 15 to 30
km) in the polar →stratosphere. They occur when the temperature
is very low (below about –95°C), such as in the Antarctic
→polar vortex, and have been observed mainly over Antarctica
Annex II: Glossary 457
in the winter and spring, and occasionally over the Arctic. PSCs
play a major role in →ozone depletion because chlorine is converted
to forms that are highly reactive with ozone through
chemical reactions on or within the cloud particles.
Polar Vortex
A dynamical structure that occurs during the polar winter in
which →stratospheric air acquires a cyclonic circulation about
the pole, with an area of relatively still air in its centre. The
vortex core air (above 16 km in altitude) becomes effectively
isolated from mid-latitude air. The polar vortex over Antarctica
is usually colder and lasts longer (throughout the austral spring)
than the polar vortex over the Arctic.
ppm, ppb, ppt
See: →Mixing ratio.
Precursors
Atmospheric compounds which themselves are not →greenhouse
gasses or →aerosols, but which have an effect on greenhouse-
gas or aerosol concentrations by taking part in physical
or chemical processes regulating their production or destruction
rates.
Present Value Cost
The sum of all costs over all time periods, with future costs
discounted.
Projection (Generic)
A potential future evolution of a quantity or set of quantities,
often computed with the aid of a model. Projections are distinguished
from predictions in order to emphasize that projections
involve assumptions concerning, for example, future socio-economic
and technological developments that may or may not be
realized, and are therefore subject to substantial uncertainty.
Propellant
The component of an →aerosol spray that acts as a forcing
agent to expel the product from the aerosol canister.
Purge System (Refrigeration)
A device used on low-pressure chillers to expel air and other
non-condensables from the circulating →refrigerant.
Push-Pull Method (Refrigeration)
A method for →recovering and →recycling →refrigerant from
a system using a negative pressure (suction) on one side to pull
the old refrigerant out and pumping recycled refrigerant vapour
to the other side to push the old refrigerant through the system.
Radiative Efficiency
A measure of the efficiency of a gas in changing →radiative
forcing. It is calculated as the marginal change in radiative forcing
per unit increase in gas concentration and typically given in
units of W m–2 ppb–1.
Radiative Forcing
Radiative forcing is the change in the net irradiance (expressed
in Watts per square meter: W m–2) at the →tropopause due to
an internal change or a change in the external forcing of the
→climate system, such as a change in the concentration of →
carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere or in the output of the
Sun. Usually radiative forcing is computed after allowing for
stratospheric temperatures to readjust to radiative equilibrium,
but with all tropospheric properties held fixed at their unperturbed
values. Radiative forcing is called instantaneous if no
change in stratospheric temperature is accounted for. See also:
→Global warming potential.
Radiative Forcing Scenario
A plausible representation of the future development of →radiative
forcing associated, for example, with →anthropogenic
changes in atmospheric composition or in land-use, or with
natural factors such as variations in →solar activity. Radiative
forcing scenarios can be used as input into simplified climate
models to compute climate projections.
Radical
A molecular entity possessing an unpaired electron.
Reclamation
Reprocessing and upgrading of a recovered controlled substance
through mechanisms such as filtering, drying, distillation
and chemical treatment in order to restore the substance to
a specified standard of performance. Chemical analysis is required
to determine that appropriate product specifications are
met. It often involves processing off-site at a central facility.
Recovery
The collection and storage of controlled substances from machinery,
equipment, containment vessels, etc., during servicing
or prior to disposal without necessarily testing or processing it
in any way.
Recycling
Reuse of a recovered controlled substance following a basic
cleaning process such as filtering and drying. For →refrigerants,
recycling normally involves recharge back into equipment
and it often occurs ‘on-site’.
Refrigerant (Refrigeration)
A heat transfer agent, usually a liquid, used in equipment such
as refrigerators, freezers and air conditioners.
Relief Valve (Refrigeration)
A device that vents refrigerant when the pressure in a →chiller
becomes dangerously high. Newer relief valves have a resealing
mechanism so that when the pressure of the chiller returns to a
normal level they reseal and prevent further refrigerant loss.
Research, Development and Demonstration
Scientific or technical research and development of new pro-
458 IPCC/TEAP Special Report: Safeguarding the Ozone Layer and the Global Climate System
duction processes or products, coupled with analysis and measures
that provide information to potential users regarding the
application of the new products or processes, such demonstration
tests and studies of the feasibility of pilot plants and other
pre-commercial applications.
Response Time (Climate System)
The response time or adjustment time is the time needed for
the →climate system or its components to re-equilibrate to a
new state, following a forcing resulting from external or internal
processes. Different components of the climate system can
have very different response times. The response time of the →
troposphere is relatively short, from days to weeks, whereas the
response time of the →stratosphere is typically a few months.
The oceans have much longer response times, of decades to
millennia, because of their large heat capacity. The response
time of the strongly coupled surface-troposphere system is
mainly determined by the oceans, and is therefore slow compared
with that of the stratosphere. The biosphere can respond
quickly, for example to droughts, but it can also respond very
slowly to other imposed changes.
See: →Lifetime, for the definition of response time in relation
to atmospheric concentrations.
Retrofit
The upgrading or adjustment of equipment so that it can be used
under altered conditions; for example, of refrigeration equipment
to be able to use a non-ozone depleting refrigerant in place
of a →chlorofluorocarbon (CFC).
Saturated Vapour Pressure
The maximum vapour pressure of a substance at a given temperature
when accumulated over its liquid or solid state in a
confined space.
Scenario (Generic)
A plausible and often simplified description of how the future
may develop, based on a coherent and internally consistent
set of driving forces and key relationships. Scenarios may be
derived from →projections, but are often based on additional
information from other sources, sometimes combined with a
‘narrative storyline’. See also: →SRES scenarios, →climate
scenario and →emission scenarios.
Semi-Aqueous Cleaning
Cleaning with a non-water-based cleaner, followed by a water
rinse.
Servicing (Refrigeration)
In the refrigeration sector, all kinds of work that may be performed
by a service technician, from installation, operations,
inspection, repair, retrofitting, redesign and decommissioning
of refrigeration systems to handling, storage, recovery and recycling
of refrigerants, as well as record-keeping.
Shortwave Radiation
See: →Solar radiation.
Smog
The buildup of high levels of pollution, generally in association
with urban areas. Photochemical smog occurs in the →troposphere
where sunlight causes chemical reactions in polluted air,
one effect of which is the generation of →ozone.
Solar Radiation
Radiation emitted by the Sun, most of which is shortwave radiation
at wavelengths less than about 1 μm and is determined
by the temperature of the Sun. See also: →Ultraviolet radiation;
compare with: →thermal infrared radiation.
Solvent
Any product (aqueous or organic) designed to clean a component
or assembly by dissolving the contaminants present on its
surface.
Specific Costs (of Abatement Options)
The difference in costs of an abatement option as compared
with a reference case, expressed in relevant specific units. In
this Report the specific costs of →greenhouse gas emission reduction
options are generally expressed in US$ per tonne of
avoided →CO2-equivalents (US$/tCO2-eq).
SRES Scenarios
→Emission scenarios developed by the IPCC Special Report
on Emission Scenarios (2000).
Stratosphere
The highly stratified region of the →atmosphere above the →
troposphere. It extends from an altitude of about 8 km in high
latitudes and 16 km in the tropics to an altitude of about 50
km. This region is characterized by increasing temperature with
altitude.
Stratospheric Polar Vortex
See: →Polar vortex
Surfactant
A product designed to reduce the surface tension of water. Also
referred to as a tension-active agent/tenside. Detergents are
made up principally from surfactants.
Technology and Economic Assessment Panel (TEAP)
A standing subsidiary body of the Parties to the →Montreal
Protocol, which was established in 1988 under Article 6 of the
Montreal Protocol and is coordinated by the →United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) Ozone Secretariat. It comprises
hundreds of experts from around the world. TEAP is responsible
for conducting assessments and for reporting to the
Parties on (a) the state of art of production and use technology,
options to →phase-out the use of →ozone-depleting substances
(ODSs), recycling, reuse and destruction techniques; and (b)
Annex II: Glossary 459
the economic effects of ozone layer modification and the economic
aspects of technology.
Thermal Infrared Radiation
Radiation emitted by the Earth’s surface, the →atmosphere and
the clouds, with wavelengths longer than the wavelength of the
red colour in the visible part of the spectrum. It is also known
as terrestrial or longwave radiation. The spectrum of infrared
radiation is distinct from that of →solar or shortwave radiation
because of the large difference in temperature between the surface
of the Sun and the Earth.
Thermoplastic
A material that can repeatedly become plastic on heating and
harden on cooling. Compare with: →Thermosetting.
Thermosetting
A material that sets permanently on heating. Compare with: →
Thermoplastic.
Threshold Limit Values (TLVs)
Exposure safety guidelines established by the American
Conference of Governmental and Industrial Hygienists
(ACGIH) based on an inhalation →time-weighted average.
TLVs ‘represent conditions under which it is believed that nearly
all workers can be repeatedly exposed day after day without
adverse effects.’ For volatile substances, such as →refrigerants,
TLVs are expressed as parts per million volume concentrations
in air (ppm).
Time-Weighted Average (TWA)
A technique used to measure the average exposure of workers
to a chemical over a given period of time.
Top-Down Models
A modelling approach that evaluates a system from aggregate
variables. An example of a top-down model is that of applied
macroeconomic theory and econometric techniques applied to
historical data on consumption, prices, incomes and factor costs
to model final demand for goods and services, and supply from
main sectors, like the energy sector, transportation, agriculture
and industry. Compare with: →Bottom-up models.
Total Equivalent Warming Impact (TEWI)
A measure of the overall global-warming impact of equipment
based on the total related →emissions of →greenhouse gases
during the operation of the equipment and the disposal of the
operating fluids at the end-of-life. TEWI takes into account
both direct fugitive emissions, and indirect emissions produced
through the energy consumed in operating the equipment. TEWI
is measured in units of mass of →CO2 equivalent. See also: →
Life cycle climate performance (LCCP).
Transitional Substance (Montreal Protocol)
Under the →Montreal Protocol, a chemical whose use is permitted
as a replacement for →ozone-depleting substances (ODSs),
but only temporarily because the substance’s →ozone depletion
potential (ODP) is non-zero.
Tropopause
The boundary between the →troposphere and the →stratosphere.
Troposphere
The lowest part of the →atmosphere above the Earth’s surface,
where clouds and ‘weather’ phenomena occur. The thickness
of the troposphere is on average 9 km in high latitudes, 10 km
in mid-latitudes, and 16 km in the tropics. Temperatures in the
troposphere generally decrease with height.
Ultraviolet Radiation (UV)
Radiation from the Sun with wavelengths between visible light
and X-rays. UV-B (280–320 nm), one of three bands of UV
radiation, is harmful to life on the Earth’s surface and is mostly
absorbed by the →ozone layer.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
Established in 1972, UNEP is the specialized agency of the
United Nations for environmental protection.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC)
An international convention whose ultimate objective is the
‘stabilization of →greenhouse-gas concentrations in the atmosphere
at a level that would prevent dangerous →anthropogenic
interface with the →climate system’. The Convention was
adopted on 9 May 1992 in New York and signed at the 1992
Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro by more than 150 countries and
the European Community. It contains commitments for all →
Parties and entered into force in March 1994. See also: →Kyoto
Protocol.
Venting (Refrigeration)
A service practice where the →refrigerant vapour is allowed
to escape into the →atmosphere after the refrigerant liquid has
been recovered.
Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs)
Organic compounds that evaporate at their temperature of use.
Many VOCs contribute to the formation of →tropospheric →
ozone and →smog.
Voluntary Agreement
An agreement between a government authority and one or
more private parties, as well as a unilateral commitment that
is recognized by the public authority, to achieve environmental
objectives or to improve environmental performance beyond
compliance.
Voluntary Measures
Measures to reduce →greenhouse-gas emissions that are adopted
by firms or other actors in the absence of government man-
460 IPCC/TEAP Special Report: Safeguarding the Ozone Layer and the Global Climate System
dates. Voluntary measures help make climate-friendly products
or processes more readily available or encourage consumers to
incorporate environmental values in their market choices.
Well-Mixed Greenhouse Gases
→Greenhouse gases with lifetimes that are long compared with
the mixing time between the two hemispheres (about 1 year),
so that their mixing ratios do not have large gradients except,
possibly, close to source regions.
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
Established in 1950, WMO is the specialized agency of the
United Nations for meteorology (weather and climate), operational
hydrology and related geophysical sciences.
Zeotrope (Refrigeration)
A blend consisting of several →refrigerants of different volatilities
that appreciably changes in composition or temperature
as it evaporates (boils) or condenses (liquefies) at a given pressure.
A refrigerant blend assigned an R-400 series number designation
in ANSI/ASHRAE 34 is a zeotrope. Compare with: →
Azeotrope